* PART ONE *



1

Lolita, light of my life, fire of my loins. My sin, my soul. Lo-lee-ta: the tip of the

tongue taking a trip of three steps down the palate to tap, at three, on the teeth. Lo.

Lee. Ta. She was Lo, plain Lo, in the morning, standing four feet ten in one sock. She

was Lola in slacks. She was Dolly at school. She was Dolores on the dotted line. But

in my arms she was always Lolita. Did she have a precursor? She did, indeed she

did. In point of fact, there might have been no Lolita at all had I not loved, one

summer, a certain initial girl-child. In a princedom by the sea. Oh when? About as

many years before Lolita was born as my age was that summer. You can always

count on a murderer for a fancy prose style. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury,

exhibit number one is what the seraphs, the misinformed, simple, noble-winged

seraphs, envied. Look at this tangle of thorns.



2

I was born in 1910, in Paris. My father was a gentle, easy-going person, a salad of

racial genes: a Swiss citizen, of mixed French and Austrian descent, with a dash of

the Danube in his veins. I am going to pass around in a minute some lovely, glossy-

blue picture-postcards. He owned a luxurious hotel on the Riviera. His father and two

grandfathers had sold wine, jewels and silk, respectively. At thirty he married an

English girl, daughter of Jerome Dunn, the alpinist, and granddaughter of two Dorset

parsons, experts in obscure subjects--paleopedology and Aeolian harps, respectively.

My very photogenic mother died in a freak accident (picnic, lightning) when I was

three, and, save for a pocket of warmth in the darkest past, nothing of her subsists

within the hollows and dells of memory, over which, if you can still stand my style (I

am writing under observation), the sun of my infancy had set: surely, you all know

those redolent remnants of day suspended, with the midges, about some hedge in

bloom or suddenly entered and traversed by the rambler, at the bottom of a hill, in

the summer dusk; a furry warmth, golden midges. My mother's elder sister, Sybil,

whom a cousin of my father's had married and then neglected, served in my

immediate family as a kind of unpaid governess and housekeeper. Somebody told

me later that she had been in love with my father, and that he had lightheartedly

taken advantage of it one rainy day and forgotten it by the time the weather cleared.

I was extremely fond of her, despite the rigidity--the fatal rigidity--of some of her

rules. Perhaps she wanted to make of me, in the fullness of time, a better widower

than my father. Aunt Sybil had pink-rimmed azure eyes and a waxen complexion.

She wrote poetry. She was poetically superstitious. She said she knew she would die

soon after my sixteenth birthday, and did. Her husband, a great traveler in

perfumes, spent most of his time in America, where eventually he founded a firm

and acquired a bit of real estate. I grew, a happy, healthy child in a bright would of

illustrated books, clean sand, orange trees, friendly dogs, sea vistas and smiling

faces. Around me the splendid Hotel Mirana revolved as a kind of private universe, a

whitewashed cosmos within the blue greater one that blazed outside. From the

aproned pot-scrubber to the flanneled potentate, everybody liked me, everybody

petted me. Elderly American ladies leaning on their canes listed towards me like

towers of Pisa. Ruined Russian princesses who could not pay my father, bought me

expensive bonbons. He, mon cher petit papa, took me out boating and biking, taught

me to swim and dive and water-ski, read to me Don Quixote and Les Miserables, and

I adored and respected him and felt glad for him whenever I overheard the servants

discuss his various lady-friends, beautiful and kind beings who made much of me

and cooed and shed precious tears over my cheerful motherlessness. I attended an

English day school a few miles from home, and there I played rackets and fives, and

got excellent marks, and was on perfect terms with schoolmates and teachers alike.

The only definite sexual events that I can remember as having occurred before my

thirteenth birthday (that is, before I first saw my little Annabel) were: a solemn,

decorous and purely theoretical talk about pubertal surprises in the rose garden of

the school with an American kid, the son of a then celebrated motion-picture actress

whom he seldom saw in the three-dimensional world; and some interesting reactions

on the part of my organism to certain photographs, pearl and umbra, with infinitely

soft partings, in Pichon's sumptuous La Beauti Humaine that that I had filched from

under a mountain of marble-bound Graphics in the hotel library. Later, in his

delightful debonair manner, my father gave me all the information he thought I

needed about sex; this was just before sending me, in the autumn of 1923, to a lycie

in Lyon (where we were to spend three winters); but alas, in the summer of that

year, he was touring Italy with Mme de R. and her daughter, and I had nobody to

complain to, nobody to consult.



3

Annabel was, like the writer, of mixed parentage: half-English, half-Dutch, in her

case. I remember her features far less distinctly today than I did a few years ago,

before I knew Lolita. There are two kinds of visual memory: one when you skillfully

recreate an image in the laboratory of your mind, with your eyes open (and then I

see Annabel in such general terms as: "honey-colored skin," "think arms," "brown

bobbed hair," "long lashes," "big bright mouth"); and the other when you instantly

evoke, with shut eyes, on the dark inner side of your eyelids, the objective,

absolutely optical replica of a beloved face, a little ghost in natural colors (and this is

how I see Lolita). Let me therefore primly limit myself, in describing Annabel, to

saying she was a lovely child a few months my junior. Her parents were old friends

of my aunt's, and as stuffy as she. They had rented a villa not far from Hotel Mirana.

Bald brown Mr. Leigh and fat, powdered Mrs. Leigh (born Vanessa van Ness). How I

loathed them! At first, Annabel and I talked of peripheral affairs. She kept lifting

handfuls of fine sand and letting it pour through her fingers. Our brains were turned

the way those of intelligent European preadolescents were in our day and set, and I

doubt if much individual genius should be assigned to our interest in the plurality of

inhabited worlds, competitive tennis, infinity, solipsism and so on. The softness and

fragility of baby animals caused us the same intense pain. She wanted to be a nurse

in some famished Asiatic country; I wanted to be a famous spy. All at once we were

madly, clumsily, shamelessly, agonizingly in love with each other; hopelessly, I

should add, because that frenzy of mutual possession might have been assuaged

only by our actually imbibing and assimilating every particle of each other's soul and

flesh; but there we were, unable even to mate as slum children would have so easily

found an opportunity to do. After one wild attempt we made to meet at night in her

garden (of which more later), the only privacy we were allowed was to be out of

earshot but not out of sight on the populous part of the plage. There, on the soft

sand, a few feet away from our elders, we would sprawl all morning, in a petrified

paroxysm of desire, and take advantage of every blessed quirk in space and time to

touch each other: her hand, half-hidden in the sand, would creep toward me, its

slender brown fingers sleepwalking nearer and nearer; then, her opalescent knee

would start on a long cautious journey; sometimes a chance rampart built by

younger children granted us sufficient concealment to graze each other's salty lips;

these incomplete contacts drove our healthy and inexperienced young bodies to such

a state of exasperation that not even the cold blue water, under which we still

clawed at each other, could bring relief. Among some treasures I lost during the

wanderings of my adult years, there was a snapshot taken by my aunt which showed

Annabel, her parents and the staid, elderly, lame gentleman, a Dr. Cooper, who that

same summer courted my aunt, grouped around a table in a sidewalk cafe. Annabel

did not come out well, caught as she was in the act of bending over her chocolat

glaci, and her thin bare shoulders and the parting in her hair were about all that

could be identified (as I remember that picture) amid the sunny blur into which her

lost loveliness graded; but I, sitting somewhat apart from the rest, came out with a

kind of dramatic conspicuousness: a moody, beetle-browed boy in a dark sport shirt

and well-tailored white shorts, his legs crossed, sitting in profile, looking away. That

photograph was taken on the last day of our fatal summer and just a few minutes

before we made our second and final attempt to thwart fate. Under the flimsiest of

pretexts (this was our very last chance, and nothing really mattered) we escaped

from the cafe to the beach, and found a desolate stretch of sand, and there, in the

violet shadow of some red rocks forming a kind of cave, had a brief session of avid

caresses, with somebody's lost pair of sunglasses for only witness. I was on my

knees, and on the point of possessing my darling, when two bearded bathers, the old

man of the sea and his brother, came out of the sea with exclamations of ribald

encouragement, and four months later she died of typhus in Corfu.



4

I leaf again and again through these miserable memories, and keep asking myself,

was it then, in the glitter of that remote summer, that the rift in my life began; or

was my excessive desire for that child only the first evidence of an inherent

singularity? When I try to analyze my own cravings, motives, actions and so forth, I

surrender to a sort of retrospective imagination which feeds the analytic faculty with

boundless alternatives and which causes each visualized route to fork and re-fork

without end in the maddeningly complex prospect of my past. I am convinced,

however, that in a certain magic and fateful way Lolita began with Annabel. I also

know that the shock of Annabel's death consolidated the frustration of that

nightmare summer, made of it a permanent obstacle to any further romance

throughout the cold years of my youth. The spiritual and the physical had been

blended in us with a perfection that must remain incomprehensible to the matter-of-

fact, crude, standard-brained youngsters of today. Long after her death I felt her

thoughts floating through mine. Long before we met we had had the same dreams.

We compared notes. We found strange affinities. The same June of the same year

(1919) a stray canary had fluttered into her house and mine, in two widely separated

countries. Oh, Lolita, had you loved me thus! I have reserved for the conclusion of

my "Annabel" phase the account of our unsuccessful first tryst. One night, she

managed to deceive the vicious vigilance of her family. In a nervous and slender-

leaved mimosa grove at the back of their villa we found a perch on the ruins of a low

stone wall. Through the darkness and the tender trees we could see the arabesques

of lighted windows which, touched up by the colored inks of sensitive memory,

appear to me now like playing cards--presumably because a bridge game was

keeping the enemy busy. She trembled and twitched as I kissed the corner of her

parted lips and the hot lobe of her ear. A cluster of stars palely glowed above us,

between the silhouettes of long thin leaves; that vibrant sky seemed as naked as she

was under her light frock. I saw her face in the sky, strangely distinct, as if it emitted

a faint radiance of its own. Her legs, her lovely live legs, were not too close together,

and when my hand located what it sought, a dreamy and eerie expression, half-

pleasure, half-pain, came over those childish features. She sat a little higher than I,

and whenever in her solitary ecstasy she was led to kiss me, her head would bend

with a sleepy, soft, drooping movement that was almost woeful, and her bare knees

caught and compressed my wrist, and slackened again; and her quivering mouth,

distorted by the acridity of some mysterious potion, with a sibilant intake of breath

came near to my face. She would try to relieve the pain of love by first roughly

rubbing her dry lips against mine; then my darling would draw away with a nervous

toss of her hair, and then again come darkly near and let me feed on her open

mouth, while with a generosity that was ready to offer her everything, my heart, my

throat, my entrails, I have her to hold in her awkward fist the scepter of my passion.

I recall the scent of some kind of toilet powder--I believe she stole it from her

mother's Spanish maid--a sweetish, lowly, musky perfume. It mingled with her own

biscuity odor, and my senses were suddenly filled to the brim; a sudden commotion

in a nearby bush prevented them from overflowing--and as we drew away from each

other, and with aching veins attended to what was probably a prowling cat, there

came from the house her mother's voice calling her, with a rising frantic note--and

Dr. Cooper ponderously limped out into the garden. But that mimosa grove--the

haze of stars, the tingle, the flame, the honey-dew, and the ache remained with me,

and that little girl with her seaside limbs and ardent tongue haunted me ever since--

until at last, twenty-four years later, I broke her spell by incarnating her in another.



5

The days of my youth, as I look back on them, seem to fly away from me in a flurry

of pale repetitive scraps like those morning snow storms of used tissue paper that a

train passenger sees whirling in the wake of the observation car. In my sanitary

relations with women I was practical, ironical and brisk. While a college student, in

London and Paris, paid ladies sufficed me. My studies were meticulous and intense,

although not particularly fruitful. At first, I planned to take a degree in psychiatry

and many manqui talents do; but I was even more manqui than that; a peculiar

exhaustion, I am so oppressed, doctor, set in; and I switched to English literature,

where so many frustrated poets end as pipe-smoking teachers in tweeds. Paris

suited me. I discussed Soviet movies with expatriates. I sat with uranists in the Deux

Magots. I published tortuous essays in obscure journals. I composed pastiches:

...Frdulen von Kulp may turn, her hand upon the door; I will not follow her. Nor

Fresca. Nor that Gull. A paper of mine entitled "The Proustian theme in a letter from

Keats to Benjamin Bailey" was chuckled over by the six or seven scholars who read

it. I launched upon an "Histoire abregie de la poisie anglaise" for a prominent

publishing firm, and then started to compile that manual of French literature for

English-speaking students (with comparisons drawn from English writers) which was

to occupy me throughout the forties--and the last volume of which was almost ready

for press by the time of my arrest. I found a job--teaching English to a group of

adults in Auteuil. Then a school for boys employed me for a couple of winters. Now

and then I took advantage of the acquaintances I had formed among social workers

and psychotherapists to visit in their company various institutions, such as

orphanages and reform schools, where pale pubescent girls with matted eyelashes

could be stared at in perfect impunity remindful of that granted one in dreams. Now

I wish to introduce the following idea. Between the age limits of nine and fourteen

there occur maidens who, to certain bewitched travelers, twice or many times older

than they, reveal their true nature which is not human, but nymphic (that is,

demoniac); and these chosen creatures I propose to designate as "nymphets." It will

be marked that I substitute time terms for spatial ones. In fact, I would have the

reader see "nine" and "fourteen" as the boundaries--the mirrory beaches and rosy

rocks--of an enchanted island haunted by those nymphets of mine and surrounded

by a vast, misty sea. Between those age limits, are all girl-children nymphets? Of

course not. Otherwise, we who are in the know, we lone voyagers, we nympholepts,

would have long gone insane. Neither are good looks any criterion; and vulgarity, or

at least what a given community terms so, does not necessarily impair certain

mysterious characteristics, the fey grace, the elusive, shifty, soul-shattering,

insidious charm that separates the nymphet from such coevals of hers as are

incomparably more dependent on the spatial world of synchronous phenomena than

on that intangible island of entranced time where Lolita plays with her likes. Within

the same age limits the number of true nymphets is trickingly inferior to that of

provisionally plain, or just nice, or "cute," or even "sweet" and "attractive," ordinary,

plumpish, formless, cold-skinned, essentially human little girls, with tummies and

pigtails, who may or may not turn into adults of great beauty (look at the ugly

dumplings in black stockings and white hats that are metamorphosed into stunning

stars of the screen). A normal man given a group photograph of school girls or Girl

Scouts and asked to point out the comeliest one will not necessarily choose the

nymphet among them. You have to be an artist and a madman, a creature of infinite

melancholy, with a bubble of hot poison in your loins and a super-voluptuous flame

permanently aglow in your subtle spine (oh, how you have to cringe and hide!), in

order to discern at once, by ineffable signs--the slightly feline outline of a

cheekbone, the slenderness of a downy limb, and other indices which despair and

shame and tears of tenderness forbid me to tabulate--the little deadly demon among

the wholesome children; she stands unrecognized by them and unconscious herself

of her fantastic power. Furthermore, since the idea of time plays such a magic part in

the matter, the student should not be surprised to learn that there must be a gap of

several years, never less than ten I should say, generally thirty or forty, and as

many as ninety in a few known cases, between maiden and man to enable the latter

to come under a nymphet's spell. It is a question of focal adjustment, of a certain

distance that the inner eye thrills to surmount, and a certain contrast that the mind

perceives with a gasp of perverse delight. When I was a child and she was a child,

my little Annabel was no nymphet to me; I was her equal, a faunlet in my own right,

on that same enchanted island of time; but today, in September 1952, after twenty-

nine years have elapsed, I think I can distinguish in her the initial fateful elf in my

life. We loved each other with a premature love, marked by a fierceness that so

often destroys adult lives. I was a strong lad and survived; but the poison was in the

wound, and the wound remained ever open, and soon I found myself maturing amid

a civilization which allows a man of twenty-five to court a girl of sixteen but not a girl

of twelve. No wonder, then, that my adult life during the European period of my

existence proved monstrously twofold. Overtly, I had so-called normal relationships

with a number of terrestrial women having pumpkins or pears for breasts; inly, I was

consumed by a hell furnace of localized lust for every passing nymphet whom as a

law-abiding poltroon I never dared approach. The human females I was allowed to

wield were but palliative agents. I am ready to believe that the sensations I derived

from natural fornication were much the same as those known to normal big males

consorting with their normal big mates in that routine rhythm which shakes the

world. The trouble was that those gentlemen had not, and I had, caught glimpses of

an incomparably more poignant bliss. The dimmest of my pollutive dreams was a

thousand times more dazzling than all the adultery the most virile writer of genius or

the most talented impotent might imagine. My world was split. I was aware of not

one but two sexes, neither of which was mine; both would be termed female by the

anatomist. But to me, through the prism of my senses, "they were as different as

mist and mast." All this I rationalize now. In my twenties and early thirties, I did not

understand my throes quite so clearly. While my body knew what it craved for, my

mind rejected my body's every plea. One moment I was ashamed and frightened,

another recklessly optimistic. Taboos strangulated me. Psychoanalysts wooed me

with pseudoliberations of pseudolibidoes. The fact that to me the only object of

amorous tremor were sisters of Annabel's, her handmaids and girl-pages, appeared

to me at times as a forerunner of insanity. At other times I would tell myself that it

was all a question of attitude, that there was really nothing wrong in being moved to

distraction by girl-children. Let me remind my reader that in England, with the

passage of the Children and Young Person Act in 1933, the term "girl-child" is

defined as "a girl who is over eight but under fourteen years" (after that, from

fourteen to seventeen, the statutory definition is "young person"). In Massachusetts,

U.S., on the other hand, a "wayward child" is, technically, one "between seven and

seventeen years of age" (who, moreover, habitually associates with vicious or

immoral persons). Hugh Broughton, a writer of controversy in the reign of James the

First, has proved that Rahab was a harlot at ten years of age. This is all very

interesting, and I daresay you see me already frothing at the mouth in a fit; but no,

I am not; I am just winking happy thoughts into a little tiddle cup. Here are some

more pictures. Here is Virgil who could the nymphet sing in a single tone, but

probably preferred a lad's perineum. Here are two of King Akhnaten's and Queen

Nefertiti's pre-nubile Nile daughters (that royal couple had a litter of six), wearing

nothing but many necklaces of bright beads, relaxed on cushions, intact after three

thousand years, with their soft brown puppybodies, cropped hair and long ebony

eyes. Here are some brides of ten compelled to seat themselves on the fascinum, the

virile ivory in the temples of classical scholarship. Marriage and cohabitation before

the age of puberty are still not uncommon in certain East Indian provinces. Lepcha

old men of eighty copulate with girls of eight, and nobody minds. After all, Dante fell

madly in love with Beatrice when she was nine, a sparkling girleen, painted and

lovely, and bejeweled, in a crimson frock, and this was in 1274, in Florence, at a

private feast in the merry month of May. And when Petrarch fell madly in love with

his Laureen, she was a fair-haired nymphet of twelve running in the wind, in the

pollen and dust, a flower in flight, in the beautiful plain as descried from the hills of

Vaucluse. But let us be prim and civilized. Humbert Humbert tried hard to be good.

Really and truly, he id. He had the utmost respect for ordinary children, with their

purity and vulnerability, and under no circumstances would he have interfered with

the innocence of a child, if there was the least risk of a row. But how his heart beat

when, among the innocent throng, he espied a demon child, "enfant charmante et

fourbe," dim eyes, bright lips, ten years in jail if you only show her you are looking

at her. So life went. Humbert was perfectly capable of intercourse with Eve, but it

was Lilith he longed for. The bud-stage of breast development appears early (10.7

years) in the sequence of somatic changes accompanying pubescence. And the next

maturational item available is the first appearance of pigmented pubic hair (11.2

years). My little cup brims with tiddles. A shipwreck. An atoll. Alone with a drowned

passenger's shivering child. Darling, this is only a game! How marvelous were my

fancied adventures as I sat on a hard park bench pretending to be immersed in a

trembling book. Around the quiet scholar, nymphets played freely, as if he were a

familiar statue or part of an old tree's shadow and sheen. Once a perfect little beauty

in a tartan frock, with a clatter put her heavily armed foot near me upon the bench

to dip her slim bare arms into me and righten the strap of her roller skate, and I

dissolved in the sun, with my book for fig leaf, as her auburn ringlets fell all over her

skinned knee, and the shadow of leaves I shared pulsated and melted on her radiant

limb next to my chameleonic cheek. Another time a red-haired school girl hung over

me in the metro, and a revelation of axillary russet I obtained remained in my blood

for weeks. I could list a great number of these one-sided diminutive romances. Some

of them ended in a rich flavor of hell. It happened for instance that from my balcony

I would notice a lighted window across the street and what looked like a nymphet in

the act of undressing before a co-operative mirror. Thus isolated, thus removed, the

vision acquired an especially keen charm that made me race with all speed toward

my lone gratification. But abruptly, fiendishly, the tender pattern of nudity I had

adored would be transformed into the disgusting lamp-lit bare arm of a man in his

underclothes reading his paper by the open window in the hot, damp, hopeless

summer night. Rope-skipping, hopscotch. That old woman in black who sat down

next to me on my bench, on my rack of joy (a nymphet was groping under me for a

lost marble), and asked if I had stomachache, the insolent hag. Ah, leave me alone

in my pubescent park, in my mossy garden. Let them play around me forever. Never

grow up.



6

A propos: I have often wondered what became of those nymphets later? In this

wrought-iron would of criss-cross cause and effect, could it be that the hidden throb

I stole from them did not affect their future? I had possessed her--and she never

knew it. All right. But would it not tell sometime later? Had I not somehow tampered

with her fate by involving her image in my voluptas? Oh, it was, and remains, a

source of great and terrible wonder. I learned, however, what they looked like, those

lovely, maddening, thin-armed nymphets, when they grew up. I remember walking

along an animated street on a gray spring afternoon somewhere near the Madeleine.

A short slim girl passed me at a rapid, high-heeled, tripping step, we glanced back at

the same moment, she stopped and I accosted her. She came hardly up to my chest

hair and had the kind of dimpled round little face French girls so often have, and I

liked her long lashes and tight-fitting tailored dress sheathing in pearl-gray her

young body which still retained--and that was the nymphic echo, the chill of delight,

the leap in my loins--a childish something mingling with the professional fretillement

of her small agile rump. I asked her price, and she promptly replied with melodious

silvery precision (a bird, a very bird!) "Cent." I tried to haggle but she saw the awful

lone longing in my lowered eyes, directed so far down at her round forehead and

rudimentary hat (a band, a posy); and with one beat of her lashes: "Tant pis," she

said, and made as if to move away. Perhaps only three years earlier I might have

seen her coming home from school! That evocation settled the matter. She led me

up the usual steep stairs, with the usual bell clearing the way for the monsieur who

might not care to meet another monsieur, on the mournful climb to the abject room,

all bed and bidet. As usual, she asked at once for her petit cadeau, and as usual I

asked her name (Monique) and her age (eighteen). I was pretty well acquainted with

the banal way of streetwalkers. They all answer "dix-huit"--a trim twitter, a note of

finality and wistful deceit which they emit up to ten times per day, the poor little

creatures. But in Monique's case there could be no doubt she was, if anything,

adding one or two years to her age. This I deduced from many details of her

compact, neat, curiously immature body. Having shed her clothes with fascinating

rapidity, she stood for a moment partly wrapped in the dingy gauze of the window

curtain listening with infantile pleasure, as pat as pat could be, to an organ-grinder

in the dust-brimming courtyard below. When I examined her small hands and drew

her attention to their grubby fingernails, she said with a naive frown "Oui, ce n'est

pas bien," and went to the wash-basin, but I said it did not matter, did not matter at

all. With her brown bobbed hair, luminous gray eyes and pale skin, she looked

perfectly charming. Her hips were no bigger than those of a squatting lad; in fact, I

do not hesitate to say (and indeed this is the reason why I linger gratefully in that

gauze-gray room of memory with little Monique) that among the eighty or so grues I

had had operate upon me, she was the only one that gave me a pang of genuine

pleasure. "Il itait malin, celui qui a inventi ce truc-la," she commented amiably, and

got back into her clothes with the same high-style speed. I asked for another, more

elaborate, assignment later the same evening, and she said she would meet me at

the corner cafe at nine, and swore she had never pose un lapin in all her young life.

We returned to the same room, and I could not help saying how very pretty she was

to which she answered demurely: "Tu es bien gentil de dire ca" and then, noticing

what I noticed too in the mirror reflecting our small Eden--the dreadful grimace of

clenched-teeth tenderness that distorted my mouth--dutiful little Monique (oh, she

had been a nymphet, all right!) wanted to know if she should remove the layer of red

from her lips avant qu'on se couche in case I planned to kiss her. Of course, I

planned it. I let myself go with her more completely than I had with any young lady

before, and my last vision that night of long-lashed Monique is touched up with a

gaiety that I find seldom associated with any event in my humiliating, sordid,

taciturn love life. She looked tremendously pleased with the bonus of fifty I gave her

as she trotted out into the April night drizzle with Humbert Humbert lumbering in her

narrow wake. Stopping before a window display she said with great gusto: "Je vais

m'acheter des bas!" and never may I forget the way her Parisian childish lips

exploded on "bas," pronouncing it with an appetite that all but changed the "a" into a

brief buoyant bursting "o" as in "bot". I had a date with her next day at 2.15 P.M. in

my own rooms, but it was less successful, she seemed to have grown less juvenile,

more of a woman overnight. A cold I caught from her led me to cancel a fourth

assignment, nor was I sorry to break an emotional series that threatened to burden

me with heart-rending fantasies and peter out in dull disappointment. So let her

remain, sleek, slender Monique, as she was for a minute or two: a delinquent

nymphet shining through the matter-of-fact young whore. My brief acquaintance

with her started a train of thought that may seem pretty obvious to the reader who

knows the ropes. An advertisement in a lewd magazine landed me, one brave day, in

the office of a Mlle Edith who began by offering me to choose a kindred soul from a

collection of rather formal photographs in a rather soiled album ("Regardez-moi cette

belle brune!". When I pushed the album away and somehow managed to blurt out

my criminal craving, she looked as if about to show me the door; however, after

asking me what price I was prepared to disburse, she condescended to put me in

touch with a person qui pourrait arranger la chose. Next day, an asthmatic woman,

coarsely painted, garrulous, garlicky, with an almost farcical Provengal accent and a

black mustache above a purple lip, took me to what was apparently her own

domicile, and there, after explosively kissing the bunched tips of her fat fingers to

signify the delectable rosebud quality of her merchandise, she theatrically drew aside

a curtain to reveal what I judged was that part of the room where a large and

unfastidious family usually slept. It was now empty save for a monstrously plump,

sallow, repulsively plain girl of at least fifteen with red-ribboned thick black braids

who sat on a chair perfunctorily nursing a bald doll. When I shook my head and tried

to shuffle out of the trap, the woman, talking fast, began removing the dingy woolen

jersey from the young giantess' torso; then, seeing my determination to leave, she

demanded son argent. A door at the end of the room was opened, and two men who

had been dining in the kitchen joined in the squabble. They were misshapen, bare-

necked, very swarthy and one of them wore dark glasses. A small boy and a

begrimed, bowlegged toddler lurked behind them. With the insolent logic of a

nightmare, the enraged procuress, indicating the man in glasses, said he had served

in the police, lui, so that I had better do as I was told. I went up to Marie--for that

was her stellar name--who by then had quietly transferred her heavy haunches to a

stool at the kitchen table and resumed her interrupted soup while the toddler picked

up the doll. With a surge of pity dramatizing my idiotic gesture, I thrust a banknote

into her indifferent hand. She surrendered my gift to the ex-detective, whereupon I

was suffered to leave.



7

I do not know if the pimp's album may not have been another link in the daisy-

chain; but soon after, for my own safety, I decided to marry. It occurred to me that

regular hours, home-cooked meals, all the conventions of marriage, the prophylactic

routine of its bedroom activities and, who knows, the eventual flowering of certain

moral values, of certain spiritual substitutes, might help me, if not to purge myself of

my degrading and dangerous desires, at least to keep them under pacific control. A

little money that had come my way after my father's death (nothing very grand--the

Mirana had been sold long before), in addition to my striking if somewhat brutal

good looks, allowed me to enter upon my quest with equanimity. After considerable

deliberation, my choice fell on the daughter of a Polish doctor: the good man

happened to be treating me for spells of dizziness and tachycardia. We played chess;

his daughter watched me from behind her easel, and inserted eyes or knuckles

borrowed from me into the cubistic trash that accomplished misses then painted

instead of lilacs and lambs. Let me repeat with quiet force: I was, and still am,

despite mes malheurs, an exceptionally handsome male; slow-moving, tall, with soft

dark hair and a gloomy but all the more seductive cast of demeanor. Exceptional

virility often reflects in the subject's displayable features a sullen and congested

something that pertains to what he has to conceal. And this was my case. Well did I

know, alas, that I could obtain at the snap of my fingers any adult female I chose; in

fact, it had become quite a habit with me of not being too attentive to women lest

they come toppling, bloodripe, into my cold lap. Had I been a frangais moyen with a

taste for flashy ladies, I might have easily found, among the many crazed beauties

that lashed my grim rock, creatures far more fascinating than Valeria. My choice,

however, was prompted by considerations whose essence was, as I realized too late,

a piteous compromise. All of which goes to show how dreadfully stupid poor Humbert

always was in matters of sex.



8

Although I told myself I was looking merely for a soothing presence, a glorified pot-

au-feu, an animated merkin, what really attracted me to Valeria was the imitation

she gave of a little girl. She gave it not because she had divined something about

me; it was just her style--and I fell for it. Actually, she was at least in her late

twenties (I never established her exact age for even her passport lied) and had

mislaid her virginity under circumstances that changed with her reminiscent moods.

I, on my part, was as naive as only a pervert can be. She looked fluffy and

frolicsome, dressed a la gamine, showed a generous amount of smooth leg, knew

how to stress the white of a bare instep by the black of a velvet slipper, and pouted,

and dimpled, and romped, and dirndled, and shook her short curly blond hair in the

cutest and tritest fashion imaginable. After a brief ceremony at the mairie, I tool her

to the new apartment I had rented and, somewhat to her surprise, had her wear,

before I touched her, a girl's plain nightshirt that I had managed to filch from the

linen closet of an orphanage. I derived some fun from that nuptial night and had the

idiot in hysterics by sunrise. But reality soon asserted itself. The bleached curl

revealed its melanic root; the down turned to prickles on a shaved shin; the mobile

moist mouth, no matter how I stuffed it with love, disclosed ignominiously its

resemblance to the corresponding part in a treasured portrait of her toadlike dead

mama; and presently, instead of a pale little gutter girl, Humbert Humbert had on

his hands a large, puffy, short-legged, big-breasted and practically brainless baba.

This state of affairs lasted from 1935 to 1939. Her only asset was a muted nature

which did help to produce an odd sense of comfort in our small squalid flat: two

rooms, a hazy view in one window, a brick wall in the other, a tiny kitchen, a shoe-

shaped bath tub, within which I felt like Marat but with no white-necked maiden to

stab me. We had quite a few cozy evenings together, she deep in her Paris-Soir, I

working at a rickety table. We went to movies, bicycle races and boxing matches. I

appealed to her stale flesh very seldom, only in cases of great urgency and despair.

The grocer opposite had a little daughter whose shadow drove me mad; but with

Valeria's help I did find after all some legal outlets to my fantastic predicament. As to

cooking, we tacitly dismissed the pot-au-feu and had most of our meals at a crowded

place in rue Bonaparte where there were wine stains on the table cloth and a good

deal of foreign babble. And next door, an art dealer displayed in his cluttered window

a splendid, flamboyant, green, red, golden and inky blue, ancient American estampe-

-a locomotive with a gigantic smokestack, great baroque lamps and a tremendous

cowcatcher, hauling its mauve coaches through the stormy prairie night and mixing a

lot of spark-studded black smoke with the furry thunder clouds. These burst. In the

summer of 1939 mon oncle d'Amirique died bequeathing me an annual income of a

few thousand dollars on condition I came to live in the States and showed some

interest in his business. This prospect was most welcome to me. I felt my life needed

a shake-up. There was another thing, too: moth holes had appeared in the plush of

matrimonial comfort. During the last weeks I had kept noticing that my fat Valeria

was not her usual self; had acquired a queer restlessness; even showed something

like irritation at times, which was quite out of keeping with the stock character she

was supposed to impersonate. When I informed her we were shortly to sail for New

York, she looked distressed and bewildered. There were some tedious difficulties with

her papers. She had a Nansen, or better say Nonsense, passport which for some

reason a share in her husband's solid Swiss citizenship could not easily transcend;

and I decided it was the necessity of queuing in the prifecture, and other formalities,

that had made her so listless, despite my patiently describing to her America, the

country of rosy children and great trees, where life would be such an improvement

on dull dingy Paris. We were coming out of some office building one morning, with

her papers almost in order, when Valeria, as she waddled by my side, began to

shake her poodle head vigorously without saying a word. I let her go on for a while

and then asked if she thought she had something inside. She answered (I translate

from her French which was, I imagine, a translation in its turn of some Slavic

platitude): "There is another man in my life." Now, these are ugly words for a

husband to hear. They dazed me, I confess. To beat her up in the street, there and

then, as an honest vulgarian might have done, was not feasible. Years of secret

sufferings had taught me superhuman self-control. So I ushered her into a taxi which

had been invitingly creeping along the curb for some time, and in this comparative

privacy I quietly suggested she comment her wild talk. A mounting fury was

suffocating me--not because I had any particular fondness for that figure of fun,

Mme Humbert, but because matters of legal and illegal conjunction were for me

alone to decide, and here she was, Valeria, the comedy wife, brazenly preparing to

dispose in her own way of my comfort and fate. I demanded her lover's name. I

repeated my question; but she kept up a burlesque babble, discoursing on her

unhappiness with me and announcing plans for an immediate divorce. "Mais qui est-

ce?" I shouted at last, striking her on the knee with my fist; and she, without even

wincing, stared at me as if the answer were too simple for words, then gave a quick

shrug and pointed at the thick neck of the taxi driver. He pulled up at a small cafi

and introduced himself. I do not remember his ridiculous name but after all those

years I still see him quite clearly--a stocky White Russian ex-colonel with a bushy

mustache and a crew cut; there were thousands of them plying that fool's trade in

Paris. We sat down at a table; the Tsarist ordered wine, and Valeria, after applying a

wet napkin to her knee, went on talking--into me rather than to me; she poured

words into this dignified receptacle with a volubility I had never suspected she had in

her. And every now and then she would volley a burst of Slavic at her stolid lover.

The situation was preposterous and became even more so when the taxi-colonel,

stopping Valeria with a possessive smile, began to unfold his views and plans. With

an atrocious accent to his careful French, he delineated the world of love and work

into which he proposed to enter hand in hand with his child-wife Valeria. She by now

was preening herself, between him and me, rouging her pursed lips, tripling her chin

to pick at her blouse-bosom and so forth, and he spoke of her as if she were absent,

and also as if she were a kind of little ward that was in the act of being transferred,

for her own good, from one wise guardian to another even wiser one; and although

my helpless wrath may have exaggerated and disfigured certain impressions, I can

swear that he actually consulted me on such things as her diet, her periods, her

wardrobe and the books she had read or should read. "I think," - he said, "She will

like Jean Christophe?" Oh, he was quite a scholar, Mr. Taxovich. I put an end to this

gibberish by suggesting Valeria pack up her few belongings immediately, upon which

the platitudinous colonel gallantly offered to carry them into the car. Reverting to his

professional state, he drove the Humberts to their residence and all the way Valeria

talked, and Humbert the Terrible deliberated with Humbert the Small whether

Humbert Humbert should kill her or her lover, or both, or neither. I remember once

handling an automatic belonging to a fellow student, in the days (I have not spoken

of them, I think, but never mind) when I toyed with the idea of enjoying his little

sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow, and then shooting myself.

I now wondered if Valechka (as the colonel called her) was really worth shooting, or

strangling, or drowning. She had very vulnerable legs, and I decided I would limit

myself to hurting her very horribly as soon as we were alone. But we never were.

Valechka--by now shedding torrents of tears tinged with the mess of her rainbow

make-up,--started to fill anyhow a trunk, and two suitcases, and a bursting carton,

and visions of putting on my mountain boots and taking a running kick at her rump

were of course impossible to put into execution with the cursed colonel hovering

around all the time. I cannot say he behaved insolently or anything like that; on the

contrary, he displayed, as a small sideshow in the theatricals I had been inveigled in,

a discreet old-world civility, punctuating his movements with all sorts of

mispronounced apologies (j'ai demande pardonne--excuse me--est-ce que j'ai puis--

may I--and so forth), and turning away tactfully when Valechka took down with a

flourish her pink panties from the clothesline above the tub; but he seemed to be all

over the place at once, le gredin, agreeing his frame with the anatomy of the flat,

reading in my chair my newspaper, untying a knotted string, rolling a cigarette,

counting the teaspoons, visiting the bathroom, helping his moll to wrap up the

electric fan her father had given her, and carrying streetward her luggage. I sat with

arms folded, one hip on the window sill, dying of hate and boredom. At last both

were out of the quivering apartment--the vibration of the door I had slammed after

them still rang in my every nerve, a poor substitute for the backhand slap with which

I ought to have hit her across the cheekbone according to the rules of the movies.

Clumsily playing my part, I stomped to the bathroom to check if they had taken my

English toilet water; they had not; but I noticed with a spasm of fierce disgust that

the former Counselor of the Tsar, after thoroughly easing his bladder, had not

flushed the toilet. That solemn pool of alien urine with a soggy, tawny cigarette butt

disintegrating in it struck me as a crowning insult, and I wildly looked around for a

weapon. Actually I daresay it was nothing but middle-class Russian courtesy (with an

oriental tang, perhaps) that had prompted the good colonel (Maximovich! his name

suddenly taxies back to me), a very formal person as they all are, to muffle his

private need in decorous silence so as not to underscore the small size of his host's

domicile with the rush of a gross cascade on top of his own hushed trickle. But this

did not enter my mind at the moment, as groaning with rage I ransacked the kitchen

for something better than a broom. Then, canceling my search, I dashed out of the

house with the heroic decision of attacking him barefisted; despite my natural vigor,

I am no pugilist, while the short but broad-shouldered Maximovich seemed made of

pig iron. The void of the street, revealing nothing of my wife's departure except a

rhinestone button that she had dropped in the mud after preserving it for three

unnecessary years in a broken box, may have spared me a bloody nose. But no

matter. I had my little revenge in due time. A man from Pasadena told me one day

that Mrs. Maximovich nie Zborovski had died in childbirth around 1945; the couple

had somehow got over to California and had been used there, for an excellent salary,

in a year-long experiment conducted by a distinguished American ethnologist. The

experiment dealt with human and racial reactions to a diet of bananas and dates in a

constant position on all fours. My informant, a doctor, swore he had seen with his

own eyes obese Valechka and her colonel, by then gray-haired and also quite

corpulent, diligently crawling about the well-swept floors of a brightly lit set of rooms

(fruit in one, water in another, mats in a third and so on) in the company of several

other hired quadrupeds, selected from indigent and helpless groups. I tried to find

the results of these tests in the Review of Anthropology; but they appear not to have

been published yet. These scientific products take of course some time to fructuate. I

hope they will be illustrated with photographs when they do get printed, although it

is not very likely that a prison library will harbor such erudite works. The one to

which I am restricted these days, despite my lawyer's favors, is a good example of

the inane eclecticism governing the selection of books in prison libraries. They have

the Bible, of course, and Dickens (an ancient set, N.Y., G.W. Dillingham, Publisher,

MDCCCLXXXVII); and the Children's Encyclopedia (with some nice photographs of

sunshine-haired Girl Scouts in shorts), and A Murder Is Announced by Agatha

Christie; but they also have such coruscating trifles as A vagabond in Italy by Percy

Elphinstone, author of Venice Revisited, Boston, 1868, and a comparatively recent

(1946) Who's Who in the Limelight--actors, producers, playwrights, and shots of

static scenes. In looking through the latter volume, I was treated last night to one of

those dazzling coincidences that logicians loathe and poets love. I transcribe most of

the page: Pym, Roland. Born in Lundy, Mass., 1922. Received stage training at

Elsinore Playhouse, Derby, N.Y. Made debut in Sunburst. Among his many

appearances are Two Blocks from Here, The Girl in Green, Scrambled Husbands, The

Strange Mushroom, Touch and Go, John Lovely, I Was Dreaming of You. Quilty,

Clare, American dramatist. Born in Ocean City, N.J., 1911. Educated at Columbia

University. Started on a commercial career but turned to playwriting. Author of The

Little Nymph, The Lady Who Loved Lightning (in collaboration with Vivian

Darkbloom), Dark Age, The strange Mushroom, Fatherly Love, and others. His many

plays for children are notable. Little Nymph (1940) traveled 14,000 miles and played

280 performances on the road during the winter before ending in New York. Hobbies:

fast cars, photography, pets. Quine, Dolores. Born in 1882, in Dayton, Ohio. Studied

for stage at American Academy. First played in Ottawa in 1900. Made New York

debut in 1904 in Never Talk to Strangers. Has disappeared since in [a list of some

thirty plays follows]. How the look of my dear love's name even affixed to some old

hag of an actress, still makes me rock with helpless pain! Perhaps, she might have

been an actress too. Born 1935. Appeared (I notice the slip of my pen in the

preceding paragraph, but please do not correct it, Clarence) in The Murdered

Playwright. Quine the Swine. Guilty of killing Quilty. Oh, my Lolita, I have only words

to play with!



9

Divorce proceedings delayed my voyage, and the gloom of yet another World War

had settled upon the globe when, after a winter of ennui and pneumonia in Portugal,

I at last reached the States. In New York I eagerly accepted the soft job fate offered

me: it consisted mainly of thinking up and editing perfume ads. I welcomed its

desultory character and pseudoliterary aspects, attending to it whenever I had

nothing better to do. On the other hand, I was urged by a war-time university in

New York to complete my comparative history of French literature for English-

speaking students. The first volume took me a couple of years during which I put in

seldom less than fifteen hours of work daily. As I look back on those days, I see

them divided tidily into ample light and narrow shade: the light pertaining to the

solace of research in palatial libraries, the shade to my excruciating desires and

insomnias of which enough has been said. Knowing me by now, the reader can easily

imagine how dusty and hot I got, trying to catch a glimpse of nymphets (alas,

always remote) playing in Central Park, and how repulsed I was by the glitter of

deodorized career girls that a gay dog in one of the offices kept unloading upon me.

Let us skip all that. A dreadful breakdown sent me to a sanatorium for more than a

year; I went back to my work--only to be hospitalized again. Robust outdoor life

seemed to promise me some relief. One of my favorite doctors, a charming cynical

chap with a little brown beard, had a brother, and this brother was about to lead an

expedition into arctic Canada. I was attached to it as a "recorder of psychic

reactions." With two young botanists and an old carpenter I shared now and then

(never very successfully) the favors of one of our nutritionists, a Dr. Anita Johnson--

who was soon flown back, I am glad to say. I had little notion of what object the

expedition was pursuing. Judging by the number of meteorologists upon it, we may

have been tracking to its lair (somewhere on Prince of Wales' Island, I understand)

the wandering and wobbly north magnetic pole. One group, jointly with the

Canadians, established a weather station on Pierre Point in Melville Sound. Another

group, equally misguided, collected plankton. A third studied tuberculosis in the

tundra. Bert, a film photographer--an insecure fellow with whom at one time I was

made to partake in a good deal of menial work (he, too, had some psychic troubles)-

-maintained that the big men on our team, the real leaders we never saw, were

mainly engaged in checking the influence of climatic amelioration on the coats of the

arctic fox. We lived in prefabricated timber cabins amid a Pre-Cambrian world of

granite. We had heaps of supplies--the Reader's Digest, an ice cream mixer,

chemical toilets, paper caps for Christmas. My health improved wonderfully in spite

or because of all the fantastic blankness and boredom. Surrounded by such dejected

vegetation as willow scrub and lichens; permeated, and, I suppose, cleansed by a

whistling gale; seated on a boulder under a completely translucent sky (through

which, however, nothing of importance showed), I felt curiously aloof from my own

self. No temptations maddened me. The plump, glossy little Eskimo girls with their

fish smell, hideous raven hair and guinea pig faces, evoked even less desire in me

than Dr. Johnson had. Nymphets do not occur in polar regions. I left my betters the

task of analyzing glacial drifts, drumlins, and gremlins, and kremlins, and for a time

tried to jot down what I fondly thought were "reactions" (I noticed, for instance, that

dreams under the midnight sun tended to be highly colored, and this my friend the

photographer confirmed). I was also supposed to quiz my various companions on a

number of important matters, such as nostalgia, fear of unknown animals, food-

fantasies, nocturnal emissions, hobbies, choice of radio programs, changes in outlook

and so forth. Everybody got so fed up with this that I soon dropped the project

completely, and only toward the end of my twenty months of cold labor (as one of

the botanists jocosely put it) concocted a perfectly spurious and very racy report that

the reader will find published in he Annals of Adult Psychophysics for 1945 or 1946,

as well as in the issue of Arctic Explorations devoted to that particular expedition;

which, in conclusion, was not really concerned with Victoria Island copper or

anything like that, as I learned later from my genial doctor; for the nature of its real

purpose was what is termed "hush-hush," and so let me add merely that whatever it

was, that purpose was admirably achieved. The reader will regret to learn that soon

after my return to civilization I had another bout with insanity (if to melancholia and

a sense of insufferable oppression that cruel term must be applied). I owe my

complete restoration to a discovery I made while being treated at that particular very

expensive sanatorium. I discovered there was an endless source of robust enjoyment

in trifling with psychiatrists: cunningly leading them on; never letting them see that

you know all the tricks of the trade; inventing for them elaborate dreams, pure

classics in style (which make them, the dream-extortionists, dream and wake up

shrieking); teasing them with fake "primal scenes"; and never allowing them the

slightest glimpse of one's real sexual predicament. By bribing a nurse I won access

to some files and discovered, with glee, cards calling me "potentially homosexual"

and "totally impotent." The sport was so excellent, its results--in my case--so ruddy

that I stayed on for a whole month after I was quite well (sleeping admirably and

eating like a schoolgirl). And then I added another week just for the pleasure of

taking on a powerful newcomer, a displaced (and, surely, deranged) celebrity, known

for his knack of making patients believe they had witnessed their own conception.



10

Upon signing out, I cast around for some place in the New England countryside or

sleepy small town (elms, white church) where I could spend a studious summer

subsisting on a compact boxful of notes I had accumulated and bathing in some

nearby lake. My work had begun to interest me again--I mean my scholarly

exertions; the other thing, my active participation in my uncle's posthumous

perfumes, had by then been cut down to a minimum. One of his former employees,

the scion of a distinguished family, suggested I spend a few months in the residence

of his impoverished cousins, a Mr. McCoo, retired, and his wife, who wanted to let

their upper story where a late aunt had delicately dwelt. He said they had two little

daughters, one a baby, the other a girl of twelve, and a beautiful garden, not far

from a beautiful lake, and I said it sounded perfectly perfect. I exchanged letters

with these people, satisfying them I was housebroken, and spent a fantastic night on

the train, imagining in all possible detail the enigmatic nymphet I would coach in

French and fondle in Humbertish. Nobody met me at the toy station where I alighted

with my new expensive bag, and nobody answered the telephone; eventually,

however, a distraught McCoo in wet clothes turned up at the only hotel of green-and-

pink Ramsdale with the news that his house had just burned down--possibly, owing

to the synchronous conflagration that had been raging all night in my veins. His

family, he said, had fled to a farm he owned, and had taken the car, but a friend of

his wife's, a grand person, Mrs. Haze of 342 Lawn Street, offered to accommodate

me. A lady who lived opposite Mrs. Haze's had lent McCoo her limousine, a

marvelously old-fashioned, square-topped affair, manned by a cheerful Negro. Now,

since the only reason for my coming at all had vanished, the aforesaid arrangement

seemed preposterous. All right, his house would have to be completely rebuilt, so

what? Had he not insured it sufficiently? I was angry, disappointed and bored, but

being a polite European, could not refuse to be sent off to Lawn Street in that funeral

car, feeling that otherwise McCoo would devise an even more elaborate means of

getting rid of me. I saw him scamper away, and my chauffeur shook his head with a

soft chuckle. En route, I swore to myself I would not dream of staying in Ramsdale

under any circumstance but would fly that very day to the Bermudas or the Bahamas

or the Blazes. Possibilities of sweetness on technicolor beaches had been trickling

through my spine for some time before, and McCoo's cousin had, in fact, sharply

diverted that train of thought with his well-meaning but as it transpired now

absolutely inane suggestion. Speaking of sharp turns: we almost ran over a

meddlesome suburban dog (one of those who like in wait for cars) as we swerved

into Lawn Street. A little further, the Haze house, a white-frame horror, appeared,

looking dingy and old, more gray than white--the kind of place you know will have a

rubber tube affixable to the tub faucet in lieu of shower. I tipped the chauffeur and

hoped he would immediately drive away so that I might double back unnoticed to my

hotel and bag; but the man merely crossed to the other side of the street where an

old lady was calling to him from her porch. What could I do? I pressed the bell

button. A colored maid let me in--and left me standing on the mat while she rushed

back to the kitchen where something was burning that ought not to burn. The front

hall was graced with door chimes, a white-eyed wooden thingamabob of commercial

Mexican origin, and that banal darling of the arty middle class, van Gogh's

"Arlisienne." A door ajar to the right afforded a glimpse of a living room, with some

more Mexican trash in a corner cabinet and a striped sofa along the wall. There was

a staircase at the end of the hallway, and as I stood mopping my brow (only now did

I realize how hot it had been out-of-doors) and staring, to stare at something, at an

old gray tennis ball that lay on an oak chest, there came from the upper landing the

contralto voice of Mrs. Haze, who leaning over the banisters inquired melodiously, "Is

that Monsieur Humbert?" A bit of cigarette ash dropped from there in addition.

Presently, the lady herself--sandals, maroon slacks, yellow silk blouse, squarish face,

in that order--came down the steps, her index finger still tapping upon her cigarette.

I think I had better describe her right away, to get it over with. The poor lady was in

her middle thirties, she had a shiny forehead, plucked eyebrows and quite simple but

not unattractive features of a type that may be defined as a weak solution of Marlene

Dietrich. Patting her bronze-brown bun, she led me into the parlor and we talked for

a minute about the McCoo fire and the privilege of living in Ramsdale. Her very wide-

set sea-green eyes had a funny way of traveling all over you, carefully avoiding your

own eyes. Her smile was but a quizzical jerk of one eyebrow; and uncoiling herself

from the sofa as she talked, she kept making spasmodic dashes at three ashtrays

and the near fender (where lay the brown core of an apple); whereupon she would

sink back again, one leg folded under her. She was, obviously, one of those women

whose polished words may reflect a book club or bridge club, or any other deadly

conventionality, but never her soul; women who are completely devoid of humor;

women utterly indifferent at heart to the dozen or so possible subjects of a parlor

conversation, but very particular about the rules of such conversations, through the

sunny cellophane of which not very appetizing frustrations can be readily

distinguished. I was perfectly aware that if by any wild chance I became her lodger,

she would methodically proceed to do in regard to me what taking a lodger probably

meant to her all along, and I would again be enmeshed in one of those tedious

affairs I knew so well. But there was no question of my settling there. I could not be

happy in that type of household with bedraggled magazines on every chair and a

kind of horrible hybridization between the comedy of so-called "functional modern

furniture" and the tragedy of decrepit rockers and rickety lamp tables with dead

lamps. I was led upstairs, and to the left--into "my" room. I inspected it through the

mist of my utter rejection of it; but I did discern above "my" bed Reni Prinet's

"Kreutzer Sonata." And she called that servant maid's room a "semi-studio"! Let's

get out of here at once, I firmly said to myself as I pretended to deliberate over the

absurdly, and ominously, low price that my wistful hostess was asking for board and

bed. Old-world politeness, however, obliged me to go on with the ordeal. We crossed

the landing to the right side of the house (where "I and Lo have our rooms"--Lo

being presumably the maid), and the lodger-lover could hardly conceal a shudder

when he, a very fastidious male, was granted a preview of the only bathroom, a tiny

oblong between the landing and "Lo's" room, with limp wet things overhanging the

dubious tub (the question mark of a hair inside); and there were the expected coils

of the rubber snake, and its complement--a pinkish cozy, coyly covering the toilet

lid. "I see you are not too favorably impressed," said the lady letting her hand rest

for a moment upon my sleeve: she combined a cool forwardness--the overflow of

what I think is called "poise"--with a shyness and sadness that caused her detached

way of selecting her words to seem as unnatural as the intonation of a professor of

"speech." "This is not a neat household, I confess," the doomed ear continued, "but I

assure you [she looked at my lips], you will be very comfortable, very comfortable,

indeed. Let me show you the garden" (the last more brightly, with a kind of winsome

toss of the voice). Reluctantly I followed her downstairs again; then through the

kitchen at the end of the hall, on the right side of the house--the side where also the

dining room and the parlor were (under "my" room, on the left, there was nothing

but a garage). In the kitchen, the Negro maid, a plump youngish woman, said, as

she took her large glossy black purse from the knob of the door leading to the back

porch: "I'll go now, Mrs. Haze." "Yes, Louise," answered Mrs. Haze with a sigh. "I'll

settle with you Friday." We passed on to a small pantry and entered the dining room,

parallel to the parlor we had already admired. I noticed a white sock on the floor.

With a deprecatory grunt, Mrs. Haze stooped without stopping and threw it into a

closet next to the pantry. We cursorily inspected a mahogany table with a fruit vase

in the middle, containing nothing but the still glistening stone of one plum. I groped

for the timetable I had in my pocket and surreptitiously fished it out to look as soon

as possible for a train. I was still walking behind Mrs. Haze though the dining room

when, beyond it, there came a sudden burst of greenery--"the piazza," sang out my

leader, and then, without the least warning, a blue sea-wave swelled under my heart

and, from a mat in a pool of sun, half-naked, kneeling, turning about on her knees,

there was my Riviera love peering at me over dark glasses. It was the same child--

the same frail, honey-hued shoulders, the same silky supple bare back, the same

chestnut head of hair. A polka-dotted black kerchief tied around her chest hid from

my aging ape eyes, but not from the gaze of young memory, the juvenile breasts I

had fondled one immortal day. And, as if I were the fairy-tale nurse of some little

princess (lost, kidnapped, discovered in gypsy rags through which her nakedness

smiled at the king and his hounds), I recognized the tiny dark-brown mole on her

side. With awe and delight (the king crying for joy, the trumpets blaring, the nurse

drunk) I saw again her lovely indrawn abdomen where my southbound mouth had

briefly paused; and those puerile hips on which I had kissed the crenulated imprint

left by the band of her shorts--that last mad immortal day behind the "Roches

Roses." The twenty-five years I had lived since then, tapered to a palpitating point,

and vanished. I find it most difficult to express with adequate force that flash, that

shiver, that impact of passionate recognition. In the course of the sun-shot moment

that my glance slithered over the kneeling child (her eyes blinking over those stern

dark spectacles--the little Herr Doktor who was to cure me of all my aches) while I

passed by her in my adult disguise (a great big handsome hunk of movieland

manhood), the vacuum of my soul managed to suck in every detail of her bright

beauty, and these I checked against the features of my dead bride. A little later, of

course, she, this nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita, was to eclipse completely her

prototype. All I want to stress is that my discovery of her was a fatal consequence of

that "princedom by the sea" in my tortured past. Everything between the two events

was but a series of gropings and blunders, and false rudiments of joy. Everything

they shared made one of them. I have no illusions, however. My judges will regard

all this as a piece of mummery on the part of a madman with a gross liking for the

fruit vert. Au fond, ga m'est bien igal. All I know is that while the Haze woman and I

went down the steps into the breathless garden, my knees were like reflections of

knees in rippling water, and my lips were like sand, and-- "That was my Lo," she

said, "and these are my lilies." "Yes," I said, "yes. They are beautiful, beautiful,

beautiful."



11

Exhibit number two is a pocket diary bound in black imitation leather, with a golden

year, 1947, en escalier, in its upper left-hand corner. I speak of this neat product of

the Blank Blank Co., Blankton, Mass., as if it were really before me. Actually, it was

destroyed five years go and what we examine now (by courtesy of a photographic

memory) is but its brief materialization, a puny unfledged phoenix. I remember the

thing so exactly because I wrote it really twice. First I jotted down each entry in

pencil (with many erasures and corrections) on the leaves of what is commercially

known as a "typewriter tablet"; then, I copied it out with obvious abbreviations in my

smallest, most satanic, hand in the little black book just mentioned. May 30 is a Fast

Day by Proclamation in New Hampshire but not in the Carolinas. That day an

epidemic of "abdominal flu" (whatever that is) forced Ramsdale to close its schools

for the summer. The reader may check the weather data in the Ramsdale Journal for

1947. A few days before that I moved into the Haze house, and the little diary which

I now propose to reel off (much as a spy delivers by heart the contents of the note

he swallowed) covers most of June. Thursday. Very warm day. From a vantage point

(bathroom window) saw Dolores taking things off a clothesline in the apple-green

light behind the house. Strolled out. She wore a plaid shirt, blue jeans and sneakers.

Every movement she made in the dappled sun plucked at the most secret and

sensitive chord of my abject body. After a while she sat down next to me on the

lower step of the back porch and began to pick up the pebbles between her feet--

pebbles, my God, then a curled bit of milk-bottle glass resembling a snarling lip--and

chuck them at a can. Ping. You can't a second time--you can't hit it--oh, marvelous:

tender and tanned, not the least blemish. Sundaes cause acne. The excess of the oily

substance called sebum which nourishes the hair follicles of the skin creates, when

too profuse, an irritation that opens the way to infection. But nymphets do not have

acne although they gorge themselves on rich food. God, what agony, that silky

shimmer above her temple grading into bright brown hair. And the little bone

twitching at the side of her dust-powdered ankle. "The McCoo girl? Ginny McCoo?

Oh, she's a fright. And mean. And lame. Nearly died of polio." Ping. The glistening

tracery of down on her forearm. When she got up to take in the wash, I had a

chance of adoring from afar the faded seat of her rolled-up jeans. Out of the lawn,

bland Mrs. Haze, complete with camera, grew up like a fakir's fake tree and after

some heliotropic fussing--sad eyes up, glad eyes down--had the cheek of taking my

picture as I sat blinking on the steps, Humbert le Bel. Friday. Saw her going

somewhere with a dark girl called Rose. Why does the way she walks--a child, mind

you, a mere child!--excite me so abominably? Analyze it. A faint suggestion of turned

in toes. A kind of wiggly looseness below the knee prolonged to the end of each

footfall. The ghost of a drag. Very infantile, infinitely meretricious. Humbert Humbert

is also infinitely moved by the little one's slangy speech, by her harsh high voice.

Later heard her volley crude nonsense at Rose across the fence. Twanging through

me in a rising rhythm. Pause. "I must go now, kiddo." Saturday. (Beginning perhaps

amended.) I know it is madness to keep this journal but it gives me a strange thrill

to do so; and only a loving wife could decipher my microscopic script. Let me state

with a sob that today my L. was sun-bathing on the so-called "piazza," but her

mother and some other woman were around all the time. Of course, I might have sat

there in the rocker and pretended to read. Playing safe, I kept away, for I was afraid

that the horrible, insane, ridiculous and pitiful tremor that palsied me might prevent

me from making my entrie with any semblance of casualness. Sunday. Heat ripple

still with us; a most favonian week. This time I took up a strategic position, with

obese newspaper and new pipe, in the piazza rocker before L. arrived. To my intense

disappointment she came with her mother, both in two-piece bathing suits, black, as

new as my pipe. My darling, my sweetheart stood for a moment near me--wanted

the funnies--and she smelt almost exactly like the other one, the Riviera one, but

more intensely so, with rougher overtones--a torrid odor that at once set my

manhood astir--but she had already yanked out of me the coveted section and

retreated to her mat near her phocine mamma. There my beauty lay down on her

stomach, showing me, showing the thousand eyes wide open in my eyed blood, her

slightly raised shoulder blades, and the bloom along the incurvation of her spine, and

the swellings of her tense narrow nates clothed in black, and the seaside of her

schoolgirl thighs. Silently, the seventh-grader enjoyed her green-red-blue comics.

She was the loveliest nymphet green-red-blue Priap himself could think up. As I

looked on, through prismatic layers of light, dry-lipped, focusing my lust and rocking

slightly under my newspaper, I felt that my perception of her, if properly

concentrated upon, might be sufficient to have me attain a beggar's bliss

immediately; but, like some predator that prefers a moving prey to a motionless

one, I planned to have this pitiful attainment coincide with the various girlish

movements she made now and then as she read, such as trying to scratch the

middle of her back and revealing a stippled armpit--but fat Haze suddenly spoiled

everything by turning to me and asking me for a light, and starting a make-believe

conversation about a fake book by some popular fraud. Monday. Delectatio morosa. I

spend my doleful days in dumps and dolors. We (mother Haze, Dolores and I) were

to go to Our Glass Lake this afternoon, and bathe, and bask; but a nacreous morn

degenerated at noon into rain, and Lo made a scene. The median age of pubescence

for girls has been found to be thirteen years and nine months in New York and

Chicago. The age varies for individuals from ten, or earlier, to seventeen. Virginia

was not quite fourteen when Harry Edgar possessed her. He gave her lessons in

algebra. Je m'imagine cela. They spent their honeymoon at Petersburg, Fla.

"Monsieur Poe-poe," as that boy in one of Monsieur Humbert Humbert's classes in

Paris called the poet-poet. I have all the characteristics which, according to writers

on the sex interests of children, start the responses stirring in a little girl: clean-cut

jaw, muscular hand, deep sonorous voice, broad shoulder. Moreover, I am said to

resemble some crooner or actor chap on whom Lo has a crush. Tuesday. Rain. Lake

of the Rains. Mamma out shopping. L., I knew, was somewhere quite near. In result

of some stealthy maneuvering, I came across her in her mother's bedroom. Prying

her left eye open to get rid of a speck of something. Checked frock. Although I do

love that intoxicating brown fragrance of hers, I really think she should wash her hair

once in a while. For a moment, we were both in the same warm green bath of the

mirror that reflected the top of a poplar with us in the sky. Held her roughly by the

shoulders, then tenderly by the temples, and turned her about. "It's right there," she

said. "I can feel it." "Swiss peasant would use the top of her tongue." "Lick it out?"

"Yeth. Shly try?" "Sure," she said. Gently I pressed my quivering sting along her

rolling salty eyeball. "Goody-goody," she said nictating. "It is gone." "Now the

other?" "You dope," she began, "there is noth--" but here she noticed the pucker of

my approaching lips. "Okay," she said cooperatively, and bending toward her warm

upturned russet face somber Humbert pressed his mouth to her fluttering eyelid. She

laughed, and brushed past me out of the room. My heart seemed everywhere at

once. Never in my life--not even when fondling my child-love in France--never--

Night. Never have I experienced such agony. I would like to describe her face, her

ways--and I cannot, because my own desire for her blinds me when she is near. I

am not used to being with nymphets, damn it. If I close my eyes I see but an

immobilized fraction of her, a cinematographic still, a sudden smooth nether

loveliness, as with one knee up under her tartan skirt she sits tying her shoe.

"Dolores Haze, ne montrez pas vos zhambes" (this is her mother who thinks she

knows French). A poet yu mes heures, I composed a madrigal to the soot-black

lashes of her pale-gray vacant eyes, to the five asymmetrical freckles on her bobbed

nose, to the blond down of her brown limbs; but I tore it up and cannot recall it

today. Only in the tritest of terms (diary resumed) can I describe Lo's features: I

might say her hair is auburn, and her lips as red as licked red candy, the lower one

prettily plump--oh, that I were a lady writer who could have her pose naked in a

naked light! But instead I am lanky, big-boned, wooly-chested Humbert Humbert,

with thick black eyebrows and a queer accent, and a cesspoolful of rotting monsters

behind his slow boyish smile. And neither is she the fragile child of a feminine novel.

What drives me insane is the twofold nature of this nymphet--of every nymphet,

perhaps; this mixture in my Lolita of tender dreamy childishness and a kind of eerie

vulgarity, stemming from the snub-nosed cuteness of ads and magazine pictures,

from the blurry pinkness of adolescent maidservants in the Old Country (smelling of

crushed daisies and sweat); and from very young harlots disguised as children in

provincial brothels; and then again, all this gets mixed up with the exquisite stainless

tenderness seeping through the musk and the mud, through the dirt and the death,

oh God, oh God. And what is most singular is that she, this Lolita, my Lolita, has

individualized the writer's ancient lust, so that above and over everything there is--

Lolita. Wednesday. "Look, make Mother take you and me to Our Glass Lake

tomorrow." These were the textual words said to me by my twelve-year-old flame in

a voluptuous whisper, as we happened to bump into one another on the front porch,

I out, she in. The reflection of the afternoon sun, a dazzling white diamond with

innumerable iridescent spikes quivered on the round back of a parked car. The

leafage of a voluminous elm played its mellow shadows upon the clapboard wall of

the house. Two poplars shivered and shook. You could make out the formless sounds

of remote traffic; a child calling "Nancy, Nan-cy!" In the house, Lolita had put on her

favorite "Little Carmen" record which I used to call "Dwarf Conductors," making her

snort with mock derision at my mock wit. Thursday. Last night we sat on the piazza,

the Haze woman, Lolita and I. Warm dusk had deepened into amorous darkness. The

old girl had finished relating in great detail the plot of a movie she and L. had seen

sometime in the winter. The boxer had fallen extremely low when he met the good

old priest (who had been a boxer himself in his robust youth and could still slug a

sinner). We sat on cushions heaped on the floor, and L. was between the woman and

me (she had squeezed herself in, the pet). In my turn, I launched upon a hilarious

account of my arctic adventures. The muse of invention handed me a rifle and I shot

a white bear who sat down and said: Ah! All the while I was acutely aware of L.'s

nearness and as I spoke I gestured in the merciful dark and took advantage of those

invisible gestures of mine to touch her hand, her shoulder and a ballerina of wool

and gauze which she played with and kept sticking into my lap; and finally, when I

had completely enmeshed my glowing darling in this weave of ethereal caresses, I

dared stroke her bare leg along the gooseberry fuzz of her shin, and I chuckled at

my own jokes, and trembled, and concealed my tremors, and once or twice felt with

my rapid lips the warmth of her hair as I treated her to a quick nuzzling, humorous

aside and caressed her plaything. She, too, fidgeted a good deal so that finally her

mother told her sharply to quit it and sent the doll flying into the dark, and I laughed

and addressed myself to Haze across Lo's legs to let my hand creep up my

nymphet's thin back and feel her skin through her boy's shirt. But I knew it was all

hopeless, and was sick with longing, and my clothes felt miserably tight, and I was

almost glad when her mother's quiet voice announced in the dark: "And now we all

think that Lo should go to bed." "I think you stink," said Lo. "Which means there will

be no picnic tomorrow," said Haze. "This is a free country," said Lo. When angry Lo

with a Bronx cheer had gone, I stayed on from sheer inertia, while Haze smoked her

tenth cigarette of the evening and complained of Lo. She had been spiteful, if you

please, at the age of one, when she used to throw her toys out of her crib so that her

poor mother should keep picking them up, the villainous infant! Now, at twelve, she

was a regular pest, said Haze. All she wanted from life was to be one day a strutting

and prancing baton twirler or a jitterbug. Her grades were poor, but she was better

adjusted in her new school than in Pisky (Pisky was the Haze home town in the

Middle West. The Ramsdale house was her late mother-in-law's. They had moved to

Ramsdale less than two years ago). "Why was she unhappy there?" "Oh," said Haze,

"poor me should know, I went through that when I was a kid: boys twisting one's

arm, banging into one with loads of books, pulling one's hair, hurting one's breasts,

flipping one's skirt. Of course, moodiness is a common concomitant of growing up,

but Lo exaggerates. Sullen and evasive. Rude and defiant. Struck Viola, an Italian

schoolmate, in the seat with a fountain pen. Know what I would like? If you,

monsieur, happened to be still here in the fall, I'd ask you to help her with her

homework--you seem to know everything, geography, mathematics, French." "Oh,

everything," answered monsieur. "That means," said Haze quickly, "you'll be here!" I

wanted to shout that I would stay on eternally if only I could hope to caress now and

then my incipient pupil. But I was wary of Haze. So I just grunted and stretched my

limbs nonconcomitantly (le mot juste) and presently went up to my room. The

woman, however, was evidently not prepared to call it a day. I was already lying

upon my cold bed both hands pressing to my face Lolita's fragrant ghost when I

heard my indefatigable landlady creeping stealthily up to my door to whisper through

it--just to make sure, she said, I was through with the Glance and Gulp magazine I

had borrowed the other day. From her room Lo yelled she had it. We are quite a

lending library in this house, thunder of God. Friday. I wonder what my academic

publishers would say if I were to quote in my textbook Ronsard's "la vermeillette

fente" or Remy Belleau's "un petit mont feutri de mousse dilicate, traci sur le milieu

d'un fillet escarlatte" and so forth. I shall probably have another breakdown if I stay

any longer in this house, under the strain of this intolerable temptation, by the side

of my darling--my darling--my life and my bride. Has she already been initiated by

mother nature to the Mystery of the Menarche? Bloated feelings. The Curse of the

Irish. Falling from the roof. Grandma is visiting. "Mr. Uterus [I quote from a girls'

magazine] starts to build a thick soft wall on the chance a possible baby may have to

be bedded down there." The tiny madman in his padded cell. Incidentally: if I ever

commit a serious murder . . . Mark the "if." The urge should be something more than

the kind of thing that happened to me with Valeria. Carefully mark that then was

rather inept. If and when you wish to sizzle me to death, remember that only a spell

of insanity could ever give me the simple energy to be a brute (all this amended,

perhaps). Sometimes I attempt to kill in my dreams. But do you know what

happens? For instance I hold a gun. For instance I aim at a bland, quietly interested

enemy. Oh, I press the trigger all right, but one bullet after another feebly drops on

the floor from the sheepish muzzle. In those dreams, my only thought is to conceal

the fiasco from my foe, who is slowly growing annoyed. At dinner tonight the old cat

said to me with a sidelong gleam of motherly mockery directed at Lo (I had just been

describing, in a flippant vein, the delightful little toothbrush mustache I had not quite

decided to grow): "Better don't if somebody is not to go absolutely dotty." Instantly

Lo pushed her plate of boiled fish away, all but knocking her milk over, and bounced

out of the dining room. "Would it bore you very much," quoth Haze, "to come with us

tomorrow for a swim in Our Glass Lake if Lo apologizes for her manners?" Later, I

heard a great banging of doors and other sounds coming from quaking caverns

where the two rivals were having a ripping row. She had not apologized. The lake is

out. It might have been fun. Saturday. For some days already I had been leaving the

door ajar, while I wrote in my room; but only today did the trap work. With a good

deal of additional fidgeting, shuffling, scraping--to disguise her embarrassment at

visiting me without having been called--Lo came in and after pottering around,

became interested in the nightmare curlicues I had penned on a sheet of paper. Oh

no: they were not the outcome of a belle-lettrist's inspired pause between two

paragraphs; they were the hideous hieroglyphics (which she could not decipher) of

my fatal lust. As she bent her brown curs over the desk at which I was sitting,

Humbert the Hoarse put his arm around her in a miserable imitation of blood-

relationship; and still studying, somewhat shortsightedly, the piece of paper she

held, my innocent little visitor slowly sank to a half-sitting position upon my knee.

Her adorable profile, parted lips, warm hair were some three inches from my bared

eyetooth; and I felt the heat of her limbs through her rough tomboy clothes. All at

once I knew I could kiss her throat or the wick of her mouth with perfect impunity. I

knew she would let me do so, and even close her eyes as Hollywood teaches. A

double vanilla with hot fudge--hardly more unusual than that. I cannot tell my

learned reader (whose eyebrows, I suspect, have by now traveled all the way to the

back of his bald head), I cannot tell him how the knowledge came to me; perhaps

my ape-ear had unconsciously caught some slight change in the rhythm of her

respiration--for now she was not really looking at my scribble, but waiting with

curiosity and composure--oh, my limpid nymphet!--for the glamorous lodger to do

what he was dying to do. A modern child, an avid reader of movie magazines, an

expert in dream-slow close-ups, might not think it too strange, I guessed, if a

handsome, intensely virile grown-up friend--too late. The house was suddenly

vibrating with voluble Louise's voice telling Mrs. Haze who had just come home about

a dead something she and Leslie Tomson had found in the basement, and little Lolita

was not one to miss such a tale. Sunday. Changeful, bad-tempered, cheerful,

awkward, graceful with the tart grace of her coltish subteens, excruciatingly

desirable from head to foot (all New England for a lady-writer's pen!), from the black

read-made bow and bobby pins holding her hair in place to the little scar on the

lower part of her neat calf (where a roller-skater kicked her in Pisky), a couple of

inches above her rough white sock. Gone with her mother to the Hamiltons--a

birthday party or something. Full-skirted gingham frock. Her little doves seem well

formed already. Precocious pet! Monday. Rainy morning. "Ces matins gris si doux . .

." My white pajamas have a lilac design on the back. I am like one of those inflated

pale spiders you see in old gardens. Sitting in the middle of a luminous web and

giving little jerks to this or that strand. My web is spread all over the house as I

listen from my chair where I sit like a wily wizard. Is Lo in her room? Gently I tug on

the silk. She is not. Just heard the toilet paper cylinder make its staccato sound as it

is turned; and no footfalls has my outflung filament traced from the bathroom back

to her room. Is she still brushing her teeth (the only sanitary act Lo performs with

real zest)? No. The bathroom door has just slammed, so one has to feel elsewhere

about the house for the beautiful warm-colored prey. Let us have a strand of silk

descend the stairs. I satisfy myself by this means that she is not in the kitchen--not

banging the refrigerator door or screeching at her detested mamma (who, I suppose,

is enjoying her third, cooing and subduedly mirthful, telephone conversation of the

morning). Well, let us grope and hope. Ray-like, I glide in through to the parlor and

find the radio silent (and mamma still talking to Mrs. Chatfield or Mrs. Hamilton, very

softly, flushed, smiling, cupping the telephone with her free hand, denying by

implication that she denies those amusing rumors, rumor, roomer, whispering

intimately, as she never does, the clear-cut lady, in face to face talk). So my

nymphet is not in the house at all! Gone! What I thought was a prismatic weave

turns out to be but an old gray cobweb, the house is empty, is dead. And then comes

Lolita's soft sweet chuckle through my half-open door "Don't tell Mother but I've

eaten all your bacon." Gone when I scuttle out of my room. Lolita, where are you?

My breakfast tray, lovingly prepared by my landlady, leers at me toothlessly, ready

to be taken in. Lola, Lolita! Tuesday. Clouds again interfered with that picnic on that

unattainable lake. Is it Fate scheming? Yesterday I tried on before the mirror a new

pair of bathing trunks. Wednesday. In the afternoon, Haze (common-sensical shoes,

tailor-made dress), said she was driving downtown to buy a present for a friend of a

friend of hers, and would I please come too because I have such a wonderful taste in

textures and perfumes. "Choose your favorite seduction," she purred. What could

Humbert, being in the perfume business, do? She had me cornered between the

front porch and her car. "Hurry up," she said as I laboriously doubled up my large

body in order to crawl in (still desperately devising a means of escape). She had

started the engine, and was genteelly swearing at a backing and turning truck in

front that had just brought old invalid Miss Opposite a brand new wheel chair, when

my Lolita's sharp voice came from the parlor window: "You! Where are you going?

I'm coming too! Wait!" "Ignore her," yelped Haze (killing the motor); alas for my fair

driver; Lo was already pulling at the door on my side. "This is intolerable," began

Haze; but Lo had scrambled in, shivering with glee. "Move your bottom, you," said

Lo. "Lo!" cried Haze (sideglancing at me, hoping I would throw rude Lo out). "And

behold," said Lo (not for the first time), as she jerked back, as I jerked back, as the

car leapt forward. "It is intolerable," said Haze, violently getting into second, "that a

child should be so ill-mannered. And so very persevering. When she knows she is

unwanted. And needs a bath." My knuckles lay against the child's blue jeans. She

was barefooted; her toenails showed remnants of cherry-red polish and there was a

bit of adhesive tape across her big toe; and, God, what would I not have given to

kiss then and there those delicate-boned, long-toed, monkeyish feet! Suddenly her

hand slipped into mine and without our chaperon's seeing, I held, and stroked, and

squeezed that little hot paw, all the way to the store. The wings of the diver's

Marlenesque nose shone, having shed or burned up their ration of powder, and she

kept up an elegant monologue anent the local traffic, and smiled in profile, and

pouted in profile, and beat her painted lashes in profile, while I prayed we would

never get to that store, but we did. I have nothing else to report, save, primo: that

big Haze had little Haze sit behind on our way home, and secundo: that the lady

decided to keep Humbert's Choice for the backs of her own shapely ears. Thursday.

We are paying with hail and gale for the tropical beginning of the month. In a volume

of the Young People's Encyclopedia, I found a map of the states that a child's pencil

had started copying out on a sheet of lightweight paper, upon the other side of

which, counter to the unfinished outline of Florida and the Gulf, there was a

mimeographed list of names referring, evidently, to her class at the Ramsdale

school. It is a poem I know already by heart. Angel, Grace Austin, Floyd Beale, Jack

Beale, Mary Buck, Daniel Byron, Marguerite Campbell, Alice Carmine, Rose Chatfield,

Phyllis Clarke, Gordon Cowan, John Cowan, Marion Duncan, Walter Falter, Ted

Fantasia, Stella Flashman, Irving Fox, George Glave, Mabel Goodale, Donald Green,

Lucinda Hamilton, Mary Rose Haze, Dolores Honeck, Rosaline Knight, Kenneth

McCoo, Virginia McCrystal, Vivian McFate, Aubrey Miranda, Anthony Miranda, Viola

Rosato, Emil Schlenker, Lena Scott, Donald Sheridan, Agnes Sherva, Oleg Smith,

Hazel Talbot, Edgar Talbot, Edwin Wain, Lull Williams, Ralph Windmuller, Louise A

poem, a poem, forsooth! So strange and sweet was it to discover this "Haze,

Dolores" (she!) in its special bower of names, with its bodyguard of roses--a fairy

princess between her two maids of honor. I am trying to analyze the spine-thrill of

delight it gives me, this name among all those others. What is it that excites me

almost to tears (hot, opalescent, thick tears that poets and lovers shed)? What is it?

The tender anonymity of this name with its formal veil ("Dolores") and that abstract

transposition of first name and surname, which is like a pair of new pale gloves or a

mask? Is "mask" the keyword? Is it because there is always delight in the

semitranslucent mystery, the flowing charshaf, through which the flesh and the eye

you alone are elected to know smile in passing at you alone? Or is it because I can

imagine so well the rest of the colorful classroom around my dolorous and hazy

darling: Grace and her ripe pimples; Ginny and her lagging leg; Gordon, the haggard

masturbator; Duncan, the foul-smelling clown; nail-biting Agnes; Viola, of the

blackheads and the bouncing bust; pretty Rosaline; dark Mary Rose; adorable Stella,

who has let strangers touch her; Ralph, who bullies and steals; Irving, for whom I

am sorry. And there she is there, lost in the middle, gnawing a pencil, detested by

teachers, all the boys' eyes on her hair and neck, my Lolita. Friday. I long for some

terrific disaster. Earthquake. Spectacular explosion. Her mother is messily but

instantly and permanently eliminated, along with everybody else for miles around.

Lolita whimpers in my arms. A free man, I enjoy her among the ruins. Her surprise,

my explanations, demonstrations, ullulations. Idle and idiotic fancies! A brave

Humbert would have played with her most disgustingly (yesterday, for instance,

when she was again in my room to show me her drawings, school-artware); he

might have bribed her--and got away with it. A simpler and more practical fellow

would have soberly stuck to various commercial substitutes--if you know where to

go, I don't. Despite my many looks, I am horribly timid. My romantic soul gets all

clammy and shivery at the thought of running into some awful indecent

unpleasantness. Those ribald sea monsters. "Mais allez-y, allez-y!" Annabel skipping

on one foot to get into her shorts, I seasick with rage, trying to screen her. Same

date, later, quite late. I have turned on the light to take down a dream. It had an

evident antecedent. Haze at dinner had benevolently proclaimed that since the

weather bureau promised a sunny weekend we would go to the lake Sunday after

church. As I lay in bed, erotically musing before trying to go to sleep, I thought of a

final scheme how to profit by the picnic to come. I was aware that mother Haze

hated my darling for her being sweet on me. So I planned my lake day with a view

to satisfying the mother. To her alone would I talk; but at some appropriate moment

I would say I had left my wrist watch or my sunglasses in that glade yonder--and

plunge with my nymphet into the wood. Reality at this juncture withdrew, and the

Quest for the Glasses turned into a quiet little orgy with a singularly knowing,

cheerful, corrupt and compliant Lolita behaving as reason knew she could not

possibly behave. At 3 a.m. I swallowed a sleeping pill, and presently, a dream that

was not a sequel but a parody revealed to me, with a kind of meaningful clarity, the

lake I had never yet visited: it was glazed over with a sheet of emerald ice, and a

pockmarked Eskimo was trying in vain to break it with a pickax, although imported

mimosas and oleanders flowered on its gravelly banks. I am sure Dr. Blanche

Schwarzmann would have paid me a sack of schillings for adding such a libidream to

her files. Unfortunately, the rest of it was frankly eclectic. Big Haze and little Haze

rode on horseback around the lake, and I rode too, dutifully bobbing up and down,

bowlegs astraddle although there was no horse between them, only elastic air--one

of those little omissions due to the absentmindedness of the dream agent. Saturday.

My heart is still thumping. I still squirm and emit low moans of remembered

embarrassment. Dorsal view. Glimpse of shiny skin between T-shirt and white gym

shorts. Bending, over a window sill, in the act of tearing off leaves from a poplar

outside while engrossed in torrential talk with a newspaper boy below (Kenneth

Knight, I suspect) who had just propelled the Ramsdale Journal with a very precise

thud onto the porch. I began creeping up to her--"crippling" up to her as

pantomimists say. My arms and legs were convex surfaces between which--rather

than upon which--I slowly progressed by some neutral means of locomotion:

Humbert the Wounded Spider. I must have taken hours to reach her: I seemed to

see her through the wrong end of a telescope, and toward her taut little rear I

moved like some paralytic, on soft distorted limbs, in terrible concentration. At last I

was right behind her when I had the unfortunate idea of blustering a trifle--shaking

her by the scruff of the neck and that sort of thing to cover my real manhge, and she

said in a shrill brief whine: "Cut it out!"--most coarsely, the little wench, and with a

ghastly grin Humbert the Humble beat a gloomy retreat while she went on

wisecracking streetward. But now listen to what happened next. After lunch I was

reclining in a low chair trying to read. Suddenly two deft little hands were over my

eyes: she had crept up from behind as if re-enacting, in a ballet sequence, my

morning maneuver. Her fingers were a luminous crimson as they tried to blot out the

sun, and she uttered hiccups of laughter and jerked this way and that as I stretched

my arm sideways and backwards without otherwise changing my recumbent

position. My hand swept over her agile giggling legs, and the book like a sleigh left

my lap, and Mrs. Haze strolled up and said indulgently: "Just slap her hard if she

interferes with your scholarly meditations. How I love this garden [no exclamation

mark in her tone]. Isn't it divine in the sun [no question mark either]." And with a

sign of feigned content, the obnoxious lady sank down on the grass and looked up at

the sky as she leaned back on her splayed-out hands, and presently an old gray

tennis ball bounced over her, and Lo's voice came from the house haughtily:

"Pardonnez, Mother. I was not aiming at you." Of course not, my hot downy darling.



12

This proved to be the last of twenty entries or so. It will be seem from them that for

all the devil's inventiveness, the scheme remained daily the same. First he would

tempt me--and then thwart me, leaving me with a dull pain in the very root of my

being. I knew exactly what I wanted to do, and how to do it, without impinging on a

child's chastity; after all, I had had some experience in my life of pederosis; had

visually possessed dappled nymphets in parks; had wedged my wary and bestial way

into the hottest, most crowded corner of a city bus full of straphanging school

children. But for almost three weeks I had been interrupted in all my pathetic

machinations. The agent of these interruptions was usually the Haze woman (who,

as the reader will mark, was more afraid of Lo's deriving some pleasure from me

than of my enjoying Lo). The passion I had developed for that nymphet--for the first

nymphet in my life that could be reached at last by my awkward, aching, timid

claws--would have certainly landed me again in a sanatorium, had not the devil

realized that I was to be granted some relief if he wanted to have me as a plaything

for some time longer. The reader has also marked the curious Mirage of the Lake. It

would have been logical on the part of Aubrey McFate (as I would like to dub that

devil of mine) to arrange a small treat for me on the promised beach, in the

presumed forest. Actually, the promise Mrs. Haze had made was a fraudulent one:

she had not told me that Mary Rose Hamilton (a dark little beauty in her own right)

was to come too, and that the two nymphets would be whispering apart, and playing

apart, and having a good time all by themselves, while Mrs. Haze and her handsome

lodger conversed sedately in the seminude, far from prying eyes. Incidentally, eyes

did pry and tongues did wag. How queer life is! We hasten to alienate the very fates

we intended to woo. Before my actual arrival, my landlady had planned to have an

old spinster, a Miss Phalen, whose mother had been cook in Mrs. Haze's family, come

to stay in the house with Lolita and me, while Mrs. Haze, a career girl at heart,

sought some suitable job in the nearest city. Mrs. Haze had seen the whole situation

very clearly: the bespectacled, round-backed Herr Humbert coming with his Central-

European trunks to gather dust in his corner behind a heap of old books; the unloved

ugly little daughter firmly supervised by Miss Phalen who had already once had my

Lo under her buzzard wing (Lo recalled that 1944 summer with an indignant

shudder); and Mrs. Haze herself engaged as a receptionist in a great elegant city.

But a not too complicated event interfered with that program. Miss Phalen broke her

hip in Savannah, Ga., on the very day I arrived in Ramsdale.



13

The Sunday after the Saturday already described proved to be as bright as the

weatherman had predicted. When putting the breakfast things back on the chair

outside my room for my good landlady to remove at her convenience, I gleaned the

following situation by listening from the landing across which I had softly crept to the

banisters in my old bedroom slippers--the only old things about me. There had been

another row. Mrs. Hamilton had telephoned that her daughter "was running a

temperature." Mrs. Haze informed her daughter that the picnic would have to be

postponed. Hot little Haze informed big cold Haze that, if so, she would not go with

her to church. Mother said very well and left. I had come out on the landing straight

after shaving, soapy-earlobed, still in my white pajamas with the cornflower blue

(not the lilac) design on the back; I now wiped off the soap, perfumed my hair and

armpits, slipped on a purple silk dressing gown, and, humming nervously, went down

the stairs in quest of Lo. I want my learned readers to participate in the scene I am

about to replay; I want them to examine its every detail and see for themselves how

careful, how chaste, the whole wine-sweet event is if viewed with what my lawyer

has called, in a private talk we have had, "impartial sympathy." So let us get started.

I have a difficult job before me. Main character: Humbert the Hummer. Time:

Sunday morning in June. Place: sunlit living room. Props: old, candy-striped

davenport, magazines, phonograph, Mexican knickknacks (the late Mr. Harold E.

Haze--God bless the good man--had engendered my darling at the siesta hour in a

blue-washed room, on a honeymoon trip to Vera Cruz, and mementoes, among

these Dolores, were all over the place). She wore that day a pretty print dress that I

had seen on her once before, ample in the skirt, tight in the bodice, short-sleeved,

pink, checkered with darker pink, and, to complete the color scheme, she had

painted her lips and was holding in her hollowed hands a beautiful, banal, Eden-red

apple. She was not shod, however, for church. And her white Sunday purse lay

discarded near the phonograph. My heart beat like a drum as she sat down, cool

skirt ballooning, subsiding, on the sofa next to me, and played with her glossy fruit.

She tossed it up into the sun-dusted air, and caught it--it made a cupped polished

plot. Humbert Humbert intercepted the apple. "Give it back," - she pleaded, showing

the marbled flush of her palms. I produced Delicious. She grasped it and bit into it,

and my heart was like snow under thin crimson skin, and with the monkeyish

nimbleness that was so typical of that American nymphet, she snatched out of my

abstract grip the magazine I had opened (pity no film had recorded the curious

pattern, the monogrammic linkage of our simultaneous or overlapping moves).

Rapidly, hardly hampered by the disfigured apple she held, Lo flipped violently

through the pages in search of something she wished Humbert to see. Found it at

last. I faked interest by bringing my head so close that her hair touched my temple

and her arm brushed my cheek as she wiped her lips with her wrist. Because of the

burnished mist through which I peered at the picture, I was slow in reacting to it,

and her bare knees rubbed and knocked impatiently against each other. Dimly there

came into view: a surrealist painter relaxing, supine, on a beach, and near him,

likewise supine, a plaster replica of the Venus di Milo, half-buried in sand. Picture of

the Week, said the legend. I whisked the whole obscene thing away. Next moment,

in a sham effort to retrieve it, she was all over me. Caught her by her thin knobby

wrist. The magazine escaped to the floor like a flustered fowl. She twisted herself

free, recoiled, and lay back in the right-hand corner of the davenport. Then, with

perfect simplicity, the impudent child extended her legs across my lap. By this time I

was in a state of excitement bordering on insanity; but I also had the cunning of the

insane. Sitting there, on the sofa, I managed to attune, by a series of stealthy

movements, my masked lust to her guileless limbs. It was no easy matter to divert

the little maiden's attention while I performed the obscure adjustments necessary for

the success of the trick. Talking fast, lagging behind my own breath, catching up

with it, mimicking a sudden toothache to explain the breaks in my patter--and all the

while keeping a maniac's inner eye on my distant golden goal, I cautiously increased

the magic friction that was doing away, in an illusional, if not factual, sense, with the

physically irremovable, but psychologically very friable texture of the material divide

(pajamas and robe) between the weight of two sunburnt legs, resting athwart my

lap, and the hidden tumor of an unspeakable passion. Having, in the course of my

patter, hit upon something nicely mechanical, I recited, garbling them slightly, the

words of a foolish song that was then popular--O my Carmen, my little Carmen,

something, something, those something nights, and the stars, and the cars, and the

bars, and the barmen; I kept repeating this automatic stuff and holding her under its

special spell (spell because of the garbling), and all the while I was mortally afraid

that some act of God might interrupt me, might remove the golden load in the

sensation of which all my being seemed concentrated, and this anxiety forced me to

work, for the first minute or so, more hastily than was consensual with deliberately

modulated enjoyment. The stars that sparkled, and the cars that parkled, and the

bars, and the barmen, were presently taken over by her; her voice stole and

corrected the tune I had been mutilating. She was musical and apple-sweet. Her legs

twitched a little as they lay across my live lap; I stroked them; there she lolled in the

right-hand corner, almost asprawl, Lola the bobby-soxer, devouring her immemorial

fruit, singing through its juice, losing her slipper, rubbing the heel of her slipperless

foot in its sloppy anklet, against the pile of old magazines heaped on my left on the

sofa--and every movement she made, every shuffle and ripple, helped me to conceal

and to improve the secret system of tactile correspondence between beast and

beauty--between my gagged, bursting beast and the beauty of her dimpled body in

its innocent cotton frock. Under my glancing finger tips I felt the minute hairs bristle

ever so slightly along her shins. I lost myself in the pungent but healthy heat which

like summer haze hung about little Haze. Let her stay, let her stay . . . As she

strained to chuck the core of her abolished apple into the fender, her young weight,

her shameless innocent shanks and round bottom, shifted in my tense, tortured,

surreptitiously laboring lap; and all of a sudden a mysterious change came over my

senses. I entered a plane of being where nothing mattered, save the infusion of joy

brewed within my body. What had begun as a delicious distention of my innermost

roots became a glowing tingle which now had reached that state of absolute security,

confidence and reliance not found elsewhere in conscious life. With the deep hot

sweetness thus established and well on its way to the ultimate convulsion, I felt I

could slow down in order to prolong the glow. Lolita had been safely solipsized. The

implied sun pulsated in the supplied poplars; we were fantastically and divinely

alone; I watched her, rosy, gold-dusted, beyond the veil of my controlled delight,

unaware of it, alien to it, and the sun was on her lips, and her lips were apparently

still forming the words of the Carmen-barmen ditty that no longer reached my

consciousness. Everything was now ready. The nerves of pleasure had been laid

bare. The corpuscles of Krause were entering the phase of frenzy. The least pressure

would suffice to set all paradise loose. I had ceased to be Humbert the Hound, the

sad-eyed degenerate cur clasping the boot that would presently kick him away. I was

above the tribulations of ridicule, beyond the possibilities of retribution. In my self-

made seraglio, I was a radiant and robust Turk, deliberately, in the full

consciousness of his freedom, postponing the moment of actually enjoying the

youngest and frailest of his slaves. Suspended on the brink of that voluptuous abyss

(a nicety of physiological equipoise comparable to certain techniques in the arts) I

kept repeating the chance words after her--barmen, alarmin', my charmin', my

carmen, ahmen, ahahamen--as one talking and laughing in his sleep while my happy

hand crept up her sunny leg as far as the shadow of decency allowed. The day before

she had collided with the heavy chest in the hall and--"Look, look!"--I gasped--"look

what you've done, what you've done to yourself, ah, look"; for there was, I swear, a

yellowish-violet bruise on her lovely nymphet thigh which my huge hairy hand

massaged and slowly enveloped--and because of her very perfunctory underthings,

there seemed to be nothing to prevent my muscular thumb from reaching the hot

hollow of her groin--just as you might tickle and caress a giggling child--just that--

and: "Oh, it's nothing at all," she cried with a sudden shrill note in her voice, and she

wiggled, and squirmed, and threw her head back, and her teeth rested on her

glistening underlip as she half-turned away, and my moaning mouth, gentlemen of

the jury, almost reached her bare neck, while I crushed out against her left buttock

the last throb of the longest ecstasy man or monster had ever known. Immediately

afterward (as if we had been struggling and now my grip had eased) she rolled off

the sofa and jumped to her feet--to her foot, rather--in order to attend to the

formidably loud telephone that may have been ringing for ages as far as I was

concerned. There she stood and blinked, cheeks aflame, hair awry, her eyes passing

over me as lightly as they did over the furniture, and as she listened or spoke (to her

mother who was telling her to come to lunch with her at the Chatfileds--neither Lo

nor Hum knew yet what busybody Haze was plotting), she kept tapping the edge of

the table with the slipper she held in her hand. Blessed be the Lord, she had noticed

nothing! With a handkerchief of multicolored silk, on which her listening eyes rested

in passing, I wiped the sweat off my forehead, and, immersed in a euphoria of

release, rearranged my royal robes. She was still at the telephone, haggling with her

mother (wanted to be fetched by car, my little Carmen) when, singing louder and

louder, I swept up the stairs and set a deluge of steaming water roaring into the tub.

At this point I may as well give the words of that song hit in full--to the best of my

recollection at least--I don't think I ever had it right. Here goes: O my Carmen, my

little Carmen! Something, something those something nights, And the stars, and the

cars, and the bars and the barmen-- And, O my charmin', our dreadful fights. And

the something town where so gaily, arm in Arm, we went, and our final row, And the

gun I killed you with, O my Carmen, The gun I am holding now. (Drew his .32

automatic, I guess, and put a bullet through his moll's eye.)



14

I had lunch in town--had not been so hungry for years. The house was still Lo-less

when I strolled back. I spent the afternoon musing, scheming, blissfully digesting my

experience of the morning. I felt proud of myself. I had stolen the honey of a spasm

without impairing the morals of a minor. Absolutely no harm done. The conjurer had

poured milk, molasses, foaming champagne into a young lady's new white purse;

and lo, the purse was intact. Thus had I delicately constructed my ignoble, ardent,

sinful dream; and still Lolita was safe--and I was safe. What I had madly possessed

was not she, but my own creation, another, fanciful Lolita--perhaps, more real than

Lolita; overlapping, encasing her; floating between me and her, and having no will,

no consciousness--indeed, no life of her own. The child knew nothing. I had done

nothing to her. And nothing prevented me from repeating a performance that

affected her as little as if she were a photographic image rippling upon a screen and

I a humble hunchback abusing myself in the dark. The afternoon drifted on and on,

in ripe silence, and the sappy tall trees seemed to be in the know; and desire, even

stronger than before, began to afflict me again. Let her come soon, I prayed,

addressing a loan God, and while mamma is in the kitchen, let a repetition of the

davenport scene be staged, please, I adore her so horribly. No: "horribly" is the

wrong word. The elation with which the vision of new delights filled me was not

horrible but pathetic. I qualify it as pathetic. Pathetic--because despite the insatiable

fire of my venereal appetite, I intended, with the most fervent force and foresight, to

protect the purity of that twelve-year-old child. And now see how I was repaid for my

pains. No Lolita came home--she had gone with the Chatfields to a movie. The table

was laid with more elegance than usual: candlelight, if you please. In this mawkish

aura, Mrs. Haze gently touched the silver on both sides of her plate as if touching

piano keys, and smiled down on her empty plate (was on a diet), and said she hoped

I liked the salad (recipe lifted from a woman's magazine). She hoped I liked the cold

cuts, too. It had been a perfect day. Mrs. Chatfield was a lovely person. Phyllis, her

daughter, was going to a summer camp tomorrow. For three weeks. Lolita, it was

decided, would go Thursday. Instead of waiting till July, as had been initially

planned. And stay there after Phyllis had left. Till school began. A pretty prospect,

my heart. Oh, how I was taken aback--for did it not mean I was losing my darling,

just when I had secretly made her mine? To explain my grim mood, I had to use the

same toothache I had already simulated in the morning. Must have been an

enormous molar, with an abscess as big as a maraschino cherry. "We have," said

Haze, "an excellent dentist. Our neighbor, in fact. Dr. Quilty. Uncle or cousin, I think,

of the playwright. Think it will pass? Well, just as you wish. In the fall I shall have

him 'brace' her, as my mother used to say. It may curb Lo a little. I am afraid she

has been bothering you frightfully all these days. And we are in for a couple of

stormy ones before she goes. She has flatly refused to go, and I confess I left her

with the Chatfields because I dreaded to face her alone just yet. The movie may

mollify her. Phyllis is a very sweet girl, and there is no earthly reason for Lo to dislike

her. Really, monsieur, I am very sorry about that tooth of yours. It would be so

much more reasonable to let me contact Ivor Quilty first thing tomorrow morning if it

still hurts. And, you know, I think a summer camp is so much healthier, and--well, it

is all so much more reasonable as I say than to mope on a suburban lawn and use

mamma's lipstick, and pursue shy studious gentlemen, and go into tantrums at the

least provocation." "Are you sure," I said at last, "that she will be happy there?"

(lame, lamentably lame!) "She'd better," said Haze. "And it won't be all play either.

The camp is run by Shirley Holmes--you know, the woman who wrote Campfire Girl.

Camp will teach Dolores Haze to grow in many things--health, knowledge, temper.

And particularly in a sense of responsibility towards other people. Shall we take

these candles with us and sit for a while on the piazza, or do you want to go to bed

and nurse that tooth?" Nurse that tooth.



15

Next day they drove downtown to buy things needed for the camp: any wearable

purchase worked wonders with Lo. She seemed her usual sarcastic self at dinner.

Immediately afterwards, she went up to her room to plunge into the comic books

acquired for rainy days at Camp Q (they were so thoroughly sampled by Thursday

that she left them behind). I too retired to my lair, and wrote letters. My plan now

was to leave for the seaside and then, when school began, resume my existence in

the Haze household; for I knew already that I could not live without the child. On

Tuesday they went shopping again, and I was asked to answer the phone if the camp

mistress rang up during their absence. She did; and a month or so later we had

occasion to recall our pleasant chat. That Tuesday, Lo had her dinner in her room.

She had been crying after a routine row with her mother and, as had happened on

former occasions, had not wished me to see her swollen eyes: she had one of those

tender complexions that after a good cry get all blurred and inflamed, and morbidly

alluring. I regretted keenly her mistake about my private aesthetics, for I simply love

that tinge of Botticellian pink, that raw rose about the lips, those wet, matted

eyelashes; and, naturally, her bashful whim deprived me of many opportunities of

specious consolation. There was, however, more to it than I thought. As we sat in

the darkness of the verandah (a rude wind had put out her red candles), Haze, with

a dreary laugh, said she had told Lo that her beloved Humbert thoroughly approved

of the whole camp idea "and now," added Haze, "the child throws a fit; pretext: you

and I want to get rid of her; actual reason: I told her we would exchange tomorrow

for plainer stuff some much too cute night things that she bullied me into buying for

her. You see, she sees herself as a starlet; I see her as a sturdy, healthy, but

decidedly homely kid. This, I guess, is at the root of our troubles." On Wednesday I

managed to waylay Lo for a few seconds: she was on the landing, in sweatshirt and

green-stained white shorts, rummaging in a trunk. I said something meant to be

friendly and funny but she only emitted a snort without looking at me. Desperate,

dying Humbert patted her clumsily on her coccyx, and she struck him, quite

painfully, with one of the late Mr. Haze's shoetrees. "Doublecrosser," she said as I

crawled downstairs rubbing my arm with a great show of rue. She did not

condescend to have dinner with Hum and mum: washed her hair and went to bed

with her ridiculous books. And on Thursday quiet Mrs. Haze drove her to Camp Q. As

greater authors than I have put it: "Let readers imagine" etc. On second thought, I

may as well give those imaginations a kick in the pants. I knew I had fallen in love

with Lolita forever; but I also knew she would not be forever Lolita. She would be

thirteen on January 1. In two years or so she would cease being a nymphet and

would turn into a "young girl," and then, into a "college girl"--that horror of horrors.

The word "forever" referred only to my own passion, to the eternal Lolita as reflected

in my blood. The Lolita whose iliac crests had not yet flared, the Lolita that today I

could touch and smell and hear and see, the Lolita of the strident voice and rich

brown hair--of the bangs and the swirls and the sides and the curls at the back, and

the sticky hot neck, and the vulgar vocabulary--"revolting," "super," "luscious,"

"goon," "drip"--that Lolita, my Lolita, poor Catullus would lose forever. So how could

I afford not to see her for two months of summer insomnias? Two whole months out

of the two years of her remaining nymphage! Should I disguise myself as a somber

old-fashioned girl, gawky Mlle Humbert, and put up my tent on the outskirts of Camp

Q, in the hope that its russet nymphets would clamor: "Let us adopt that deep-

voiced D.P.," and drag the said, shyly smiling Berthe au Grand Pied to their rustic

hearth. Berthe will sleep with Dolores Haze! Idle dry dreams. Two months of beauty,

two months of tenderness, would be squandered forever, and I could do nothing

about it, but nothing, mais rien. One drop of rare honey, however, that Thursday did

hold in its acorn cup. Haze was to drive her to the camp in the early morning. Upon

sundry sounds of departure reaching me, I rolled out of bed and leaned out of the

window. Under the poplars, the car was already athrob. On the sidewalk, Louise

stood shading her eyes with her hand, as if the little traveler were already riding into

the low morning sun. The gesture proved to be premature. "Hurry up!" shouted

Haze. My Lolita, who was half in and about to slam the car door, wind down the

glass, wave to Louise and the poplars (whom and which she was never to see again),

interrupted the motion of fate: she looked up--and dashed back into the house (Haze

furiously calling after her). A moment later I heard my sweetheart running up the

stairs. My heart expanded with such force that it almost blotted me out. I hitched up

the pants of my pajamas, flung the door open: and simultaneously Lolita arrived, in

her Sunday frock, stamping, panting, and then she was in my arms, her innocent

mouth melting under the ferocious pressure of dark male jaws, my palpitating

darling! The next instant I heart her--alive, unraped--clatter downstairs. The motion

of fate was resumed. The blond leg was pulled in, the car door was slammed--was

re-slammed--and driver Haze at the violent wheel, rubber-red lips writhing in angry,

inaudible speech, swung my darling away, while unnoticed by them or Louise, old

Miss Opposite, an invalid, feebly but rhythmically waved from her vined verandah.



16

The hollow of my hand was still ivory-full of Lolita--full of the feel of her pre-

adolescently incurved back, that ivory-smooth, sliding sensation of her skin through

the thin frock that I had worked up and down while I held her. I marched into her

tumbled room, threw open the door of the closet, and plunged into a heap of

crumpled things that had touched her. There was particularly one pink texture,

sleazy, torn, with a faintly acrid odor in the seam. I wrapped in it Humbert's huge

engorged heart. A poignant chaos was welling within me--but I had to drop those

things and hurriedly regain my composure, as I became aware of the maid's velvety

voice calling me softly from the stairs. She had a message for me, she said; and,

topping my automatic thanks with a kindly "you're welcome," good Louise left an

unstamped, curiously clean-looking letter in my shaking hand. "This is a confession. I

love you [so the letter began; and for a distorted moment I mistook its hysterical

scrawl for a schoolgirl's scribble]. Last Sunday in church--bad you, who refused to

come to see our beautiful new windows!--only last Sunday, my dear one, when I

asked the Lord what to do about it, I was told to act as I am acting now. You see,

there is no alternative. I have loved you from the minute I saw you. I am a

passionate and lonely woman and you are the love of my life. Now, my dearest,

dearest, mon cher, cher monsieur, you have read this; now you know. So, will you

please, at once, pack and leave. This is a landlady's order. I am dismissing a lodger.

I am kicking you out. Go! Scram! Departez! I shall be back by dinnertime, if I do

eighty both ways and don't have an accident (but what would it matter?), and I do

not wish to find you in the house. Please, please, leave at once, now, do not even

read this absurd note to the end. Go. Adieu. The situation, chiri, is quite simple. Of

course, I know with absolute certainty that I am nothing to you, nothing at all to

you, nothing at all. Oh yes, you enjoy talking to me (and kidding poor me), you have

grown fond of our friendly house, of the books I like, of my lovely garden, even of

Lo's noisy ways--but I am nothing to you. Right? Right. Nothing to you whatever.

But if, after reading my "confession," you decided, in your dark romantic European

way, that I am attractive enough for you to take advantage of my letter and make a

pass at me, then you would be a criminal--worse than a kidnaper who rapes a child.

You see, chiri. If you decided to stay, if I found you at home (which I know I won't--

and that's why I am able to go on like this), the fact of your remaining would only

mean one thing: that you want me as much as I do you: as a lifelong mate; and that

you are ready to link up your life with mine forever and ever and be a father to my

little girl. Let me rave and ramble on for a teeny while more, my dearest, since I

know this letter has been by now torn by you, and its pieces (illegible) in the vortex

of the toilet. My dearest, mon trhs, trhs cher, what a world of love I have built up for

you during this miraculous June! I know how reserved you are, how "British." Your

old-world reticence, your sense of decorum may be shocked by the boldness of an

American girl! You who conceal your strongest feelings must think me a shameless

little idiot for throwing open my poor bruised heart like this. In years gone by, many

disappointments came my way. Mr. Haze was a splendid person, a sterling soul, but

he happened to be twenty years my senior, and--well, let us not gossip about the

past. My dearest, your curiosity must be well satisfied if you have ignored my

request and read this letter to the bitter end. Never mind. Destroy it and go. Do not

forget to leave the key on the desk in your room. And some scrap of address so that

I could refund the twelve dollars I owe you till the end of the month. Good-bye, dear

one. Pray for me--if you ever pray. C.H." What I present here is what I remember of

the letter, and what I remember of the letter I remember verbatim (including that

awful French). It was at least twice longer. I have left out a lyrical passage which I

more or less skipped at the time, concerning Lolita's brother who died at 2 when she

was 4, and how much I would have liked him. Let me see what else can I say? Yes.

There is just a chance that "the vortex of the toilet" (where the letter did go) is my

own matter-of-fact contribution. She probably begged me to make a special fire to

consume it. My first movement was one of repulsion and retreat. My second was like

a friend's calm hand falling upon my shoulder and bidding me take my time. I did. I

came out of my daze and found myself still in Lo's room. A full-page ad ripped out of

a slick magazine was affixed to the wall above the bed, between a crooner's mug and

the lashes of a movie actress. It represented a dark-haired young husband with a

kind of drained look in his Irish eyes. He was modeling a robe by So-and-So and

holding a bridgelike tray by So-and-So, with breakfast for two. The legend, by the

Rev. Thomas Morell, called him a "conquering hero." The thoroughly conquered lady

(not shown) was presumably propping herself up to receive her half of the tray. How

her bed-fellow was to get under the bridge without some messy mishap was not

clear. Lo had drawn a jocose arrow to the haggard lover's face and had put, in block

letters: H.H. And indeed, despite a difference of a few years, the resemblance was

striking. Under this was another picture, also a colored ad. A distinguished

playwright was solemnly smoking a Drome. He always smoked Dromes. The

resemblance was slight. Under this was Lo's chase bed, littered with "comics." The

enamel had come off the bedstead, leaving black, more or less rounded, marks on

the white. Having convinced myself that Louise had left, I got into Lo's bed and

reread the letter.



17

Gentlemen of the jury! I cannot swear that certain motions pertaining to the

business in hand--if I may coin an expression--had not drifted across my mind

before. My mind had not retained them in any logical form or in any relation to

definitely recollected occasions; but I cannot swear--let me repeat--that I had not

toyed with them (to rig up yet another expression), in my dimness of thought, in my

darkness of passion. There may have been times--there must have been times, if I

know my Humbert--when I had brought up for detached inspection the idea of

marrying a mature widow (say, Charlotte Haze) with not one relative left in the wide

gray world, merely in order to have my way with her child (Lo, Lola, Lolita). I am

even prepared to tell my tormentors that perhaps once or twice I had cast an

appraiser's cold eye at Charlotte's coral lips and bronze hair and dangerously low

neckline, and had vaguely tried to fit her into a plausible daydream. This I confess

under torture. Imaginary torture, perhaps, but all the more horrible. I wish I might

digress and tell you more of the pavor nocturnus that would rack me at night

hideously after a chance term had struck me in the random readings of my boyhood,

such as peine forte et dure (what a Genius of Pain must have invented that!) or the

dreadful, mysterious, insidious words "trauma," "traumatic event," and "transom."

But my tale is sufficiently incondite already. After a while I destroyed the letter and

went to my room, and ruminated, and rumpled my hair, and modeled my purple

robe, and moaned through clenched teeth and suddenly--Suddenly, gentlemen of the

jury, I felt a Dostoevskian grin dawning (through the very grimace that twisted my

lips) like a distant and terrible sun. I imagined (under conditions of new and perfect

visibility) all the casual caresses her mother's husband would be able to lavish on his

Lolita. I would hold her against me three times a day, every day. All my troubles

would be expelled, I would be a healthy man. "To hold thee lightly on a gentle knee

and print on thy soft cheek a parent's kiss . . ." Well-read Humbert! Then, with all

possible caution, on mental tiptoe so to speak, I conjured up Charlotte as a possible

mate. By God, I could make myself bring her that economically halved grapefruit,

that sugarless breakfast. Humbert Humbert sweating in the fierce white light, and

howled at, and trodden upon by sweating policemen, is now ready to make a further

"statement" (quel mot!) as he turns his conscience inside out and rips off its

innermost lining. I did not plan to marry poor Charlotte in order to eliminate her in

some vulgar, gruesome and dangerous manner such as killing her by placing five

bichloride-of-mercury tablets in her preprandial sherry or anything like that; but a

delicately allied, pharmacopoeial thought did tinkle in my sonorous and clouded

brain. Why limit myself to the modest masked caress I had tried already? Other

visions of venery presented themselves to me swaying and smiling. I saw myself

administering a powerful sleeping potion to both mother and daughter so as to

fondle the latter though the night with perfect impunity. The house was full of

Charlotte's snore, while Lolita hardly breathed in her sleep, as still as a painted girl-

child. "Mother, I swear Kenny never even touched me." "You either lie, Dolores Haze,

or it was an incubus." No, I would not go that far. So Humbert the Cubus schemed

and dreamed--and the red sun of desire and decision (the two things that create a

live world) rose higher and higher, while upon a succession of balconies a succession

of libertines, sparkling glass in hand, toasted the bliss of past and future nights.

Then, figuratively speaking, I shattered the glass, and boldly imagined (for I was

drunk on those visions by then and underrated the gentleness of my nature) how

eventually I might blackmail--no, that it too strong a word--mauvemail big Haze into

letting me consort with the little Haze by gently threatening the poor doting Big Dove

with desertion if she tried to bar me from playing with my legal stepdaughter. In a

word, before such an Amazing Offer, before such a vastness and variety of vistas, I

was as helpless as Adam at the preview of early oriental history, miraged in his apple

orchard. And now take down the following important remark: the artist in me has

been given the upper hand over the gentleman. It is with a great effort of will that in

this memoir I have managed to tune my style to the tone of the journal that I kept

when Mrs. Haze was to me but an obstacle. That journal of mine is no more; but I

have considered it my artistic duty to preserve its intonations no matter how false

and brutal they may seem to me now. Fortunately, my story has reached a point

where I can cease insulting poor Charlotte for the sake of retrospective

verisimilitude. Wishing to spare poor Charlotte two or three hours of suspense on a

winding road (and avoid, perhaps, a head-on collision that would shatter our

different dreams), I made a thoughtful but abortive attempt to reach her at the

camp by telephone. She had left half an hour before, and getting Lo instead, I told

her--trembling and brimming with my mastery over fate--that I was going to marry

her mother. I had to repeat it twice because something was preventing her from

giving me her attention. "Gee, that's swell," she said laughing. "When is the

wedding? Hold on a sec, the pup--That put here has got hold of my sock. Listen--"

and she added she guessed she was going to have loads of fun . . . and I realized as

I hung up that a couple of hours at that camp had been sufficient to blot out with

new impressions the image of handsome Humbert Humbert from little Lolita's mind.

But what did it matter now? I would get her back as soon as a decent amount of

time after the wedding had elapsed. "The orange blossom would have scarcely

withered on the grave," as a poet might have said. But I am no poet. I am only a

very conscientious recorder. After Louise had gone, I inspected the icebox, and

finding it much too puritanic, walked to town and bought the richest foods available.

I also bought some good liquor and two or three kinds of vitamins. I was pretty sure

that with the aid of these stimulants and my natural resources, I would avert any

embarrassment that my indifference might incur when called upon to display a

strong and impatient flame. Again and again resourceful Humbert evoked Charlotte

as seen in the raree-show of a manly imagination. She was well groomed and

shapely, this I could say for her, and she was my Lolita's big sister--this notion,

perhaps, I could keep up if only I did not visualize too realistically her heavy hips,

round knees, ripe bust, the coarse pink skin of her neck ("coarse" by comparison

with silk and honey) and all the rest of that sorry and dull thing: a handsome

woman. The sun made its usual round of the house as the afternoon ripened into

evening. I had a drink. And another. And yet another. Gin and pineapple juice, my

favorite mixture, always double my energy. I decided to busy myself with our

unkempt lawn. Une petite attention. It was crowded with dandelions, and a cursed

dog--I loathe dogs--had defiled the flat stones where a sundial had once stood. Most

of the dandelions had changed from suns to moons. The gin and Lolita were dancing

in me, and I almost fell over the folding chairs that I attempted to dislodge.

Incarnadine zebras! There are some eructations that sound like cheers--at least,

mine did. An old fence at the back of the garden separated us from the neighbor's

garbage receptacles and lilacs; but there was nothing between the front end of our

lawn (where it sloped along one side of the house) and the street. Therefore I was

able to watch (with the smirk of one about to perform a good action) for the return

of Charlotte: that tooth should be extracted at once. As I lurched and lunged with

the hand mower, bits of grass optically twittering in the low sun, I kept an eye on

that section of suburban street. It curved in from under an archway of huge shade

trees, then sped towards us down, down, quite sharply, past old Miss Opposite's

ivied brick house and high-sloping lawn (much trimmer than ours) and disappeared

behind our own front porch which I could not see from where I happily belched and

labored. The dandelions perished. A reek of sap mingled with the pineapple. Two

little girls, Marion and Mabel, whose comings and goings I had mechanically followed

of late (but who could replace my Lolita?) went toward the avenue (from which our

Lawn Street cascaded), one pushing a bicycle, the other feeding from a paper bag,

both talking at the top of their sunny voices. Leslie, old Miss Opposite's gardener and

chauffeur, a very amiable and athletic Negro, grinned at me from afar and shouted,

re-shouted, commented by gesture, that I was mighty energetic today. The fool dog

of the prosperous junk dealer next door ran after a blue car--not Charlotte's. The

prettier of the two little girls (Mabel, I think), shorts, halter with little to halt, bright

hair--a nymphet, by Pan!--ran back down the street crumpling her paper bag and

was hidden from this Green Goat by the frontage of Mr. And Mrs. Humbert's

residence. A station wagon popped out of the leafy shade of the avenue, dragging

some of it on its roof before the shadows snapped, and swung by at an idiotic pace,

the sweatshirted driver roof-holding with his left hand and the junkman's dog tearing

alongside. There was a smiling pause--and then, with a flutter in my breast, I

witnessed the return of the Blue Sedan. I saw it glide downhill and disappear behind

the corner of the house. I had a glimpse of her calm pale profile. It occurred to me

that until she went upstairs she would not know whether I had gone or not. A minute

later, with an expression of great anguish on her face, she looked down at me from

the window of Lo's room. By sprinting upstairs, I managed to reach that room before

she left it.



18

When the bride is a window and the groom is a widower; when the former has lived

in Our Great Little Town for hardly two years, and the latter for hardly a month;

when Monsieur wants to get the whole damned thing over with as quickly as

possible, and Madame gives in with a tolerant smile; then, my reader, the wedding is

generally a "quiet" affair. The bride may dispense with a tiara of orange blossoms

securing her finger-tip veil, nor does she carry a white orchid in a prayer book. The

bride's little daughter might have added to the ceremonies uniting H. and H. a touch

of vivid vermeil; but I knew I would not dare be too tender with cornered Lolita yet,

and therefore agreed it was not worth while tearing the child away from her beloved

Camp Q. My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte was in everyday life matter-

of-fact and gregarious. Moreover, I discovered that although she could not control

her heart or her cries, she was a woman of principle. Immediately after she had

become more or less my mistress (despite the stimulants, her "nervous, eager chiri--

a heroic chiri!--had some initial trouble, for which, however, he amply compensated

her by a fantastic display of old-world endearments), good Charlotte interviewed me

about my relations with God. I could have answered that on that score my mind was

open; I said, instead--paying my tribute to a pious platitude--that I believed in a

cosmic spirit. Looking down at her fingernails, she also asked me had I not in my

family a certain strange strain. I countered by inquiring whether she would still want

to marry me if my father's maternal grandfather had been, say, a Turk. She said it

did not matter a bit; but that, if she ever found out I did not believe in Our Christian

God, she would commit suicide. She said it so solemnly that it gave me the creeps. It

was then I knew she was a woman of principle. Oh, she was very genteel: she said

"excuse me" whenever a slight burp interrupted her flowing speech, called an

envelope and ahnvelope, and when talking to her lady-friends referred to me as Mr.

Humbert. I thought it would please her if I entered the community trailing some

glamour after me. On the day of our wedding a little interview with me appeared in

the Society Column of the Ramsdale Journal, with a photograph of Charlotte, one

eyebrow up and a misprint in her name ("Hazer"). Despite this contretempts, the

publicity warmed the porcelain cockles of her heart--and made my rattles shake with

awful glee. by engaging in church work as well as by getting to know the better

mothers of Lo's schoolmates, Charlotte in the course of twenty months or so had

managed to become if not a prominent, at least an acceptable citizen, but never

before had she come under that thrilling rubrique, and it was I who put her there,

Mr. Edgar H. Humbert (I threw in the "Edgar" just for the heck of it), "writer and

explorer." McCoo's brother, when taking it down, asked me what I had written.

Whatever I told him came out as "several books on Peacock, Rainbow and other

poets." It was also noted that Charlotte and I had known each other for several

years and that I was a distant relation of her first husband. I hinted I had had an

affair with her thirteen years ago but this was not mentioned in print. To Charlotte I

said that society columns should contain a shimmer of errors. Let us go on with this

curious tale. When called upon to enjoy my promotion from lodger to lover, did I

experience only bitterness and distaste? No. Mr. Humbert confesses to a certain

titillation of his vanity, to some faint tenderness, even to a pattern of remorse

daintily running along the steel of his conspiratorial dagger. Never had I thought that

the rather ridiculous, through rather handsome Mrs. Haze, with her blind faith in the

wisdom of her church and book club, her mannerisms of elocution, her harsh, cold,

contemptuous attitude toward an adorable, downy-armed child of twelve, could turn

into such a touching, helpless creature as soon as I laid my hands upon her which

happened on the threshold of Lolita's room whither she tremulously backed

repeating "no, no, please no." The transformation improved her looks. Her smile that

had been such a contrived thing, thenceforth became the radiance of utter

adoration--a radiance having something soft and moist about it, in which, with

wonder, I recognized a resemblance to the lovely, inane, lost look that Lo had when

gloating over a new kind of concoction at the soda fountain or mutely admiring my

expensive, always tailor-fresh clothes. Deeply fascinated, I would watch Charlotte

while she swapped parental woes with some other lady and made that national

grimace of feminine resignation (eyes rolling up, mouth drooping sideways) which, in

an infantile form, I had seen Lo making herself. We had highballs before turning in,

and with their help, I would manage to evoke the child while caressing the mother.

This was the white stomach within which my nymphet had been a little curved fish in

1934. This carefully dyed hair, so sterile to my sense of smell and touch, acquired at

certain lamplit moments in the poster bed the tinge, if not the texture, of Lolita's

curls. I kept telling myself, as I wielded my brand-new large-as-life wife, that

biologically this was the nearest I could get to Lolita; that at Lolita's age, Lotte had

been as desirable a schoolgirl as her daughter was, and as Lolita's daughter would be

some day. I had my wife unearth from under a collection of shoes (Mr. Haze had a

passion for them, it appears) a thirty-year-old album, so that I might see how Lotte

had looked as a child; and even though the light was wrong and the dresses

graceless, I was able to make out a dim first version of Lolita's outline, legs,

cheekbones, bobbed nose. Lottelita, Lolitchen. So I tom-peeped across the hedges of

years, into wan little windows. And when, by means of pitifully ardent, naively

lascivious caresses, she of the noble nipple and massive thigh prepared me for the

performance of my nightly duty, it was still a nymphet's scent that in despair I tried

to pick up, as I bayed through the undergrowth of dark decaying forests. I simply

can't tell you how gentle, how touching my poor wife was. At breakfast, in the

depressingly bright kitchen, with its chrome glitter and Hardware and Co. Calendar

and cute breakfast nook (simulating that Coffee Shoppe where in their college days

Charlotte and Humbert used to coo together), she would sit, robed in red, her elbow

on the plastic-topped table, her cheek propped on her fist, and stare at me with

intolerable tenderness as I consumed my ham and eggs. Humbert's face might

twitch with neuralgia, but in her eyes it vied in beauty and animation with the sun

and shadows of leaves rippling on the white refrigerator. My solemn exasperation

was to her the silence of love. My small income added to her even smaller one

impressed her as a brilliant fortune; not because the resulting sum now sufficed for

most middle-class needs, but because even my money shone in her eyes with the

magic of my manliness, and she saw our joint account as one of those southern

boulevards at midday that have solid shade on one side and smooth sunshine on the

other, all the way to the end of a prospect, where pink mountains loom. Into the fifty

days of our cohabitation Charlotte crammed the activities of as many years. The poor

woman busied herself with a number of things she had foregone long before or had

never been much interested in, as if (to prolong these Proustian intonations) by my

marrying the mother of the child I loved I had enabled my wife to regain an

abundance of youth by proxy. With the zest of a banal young bride, she started to

"glorify the home." Knowing as I did its every cranny by heart--since those days

when from my chair I mentally mapped out Lolita's course through the house--I had

long entered into a sort of emotional relationship with it, with its very ugliness and

dirt, and now I could almost feel the wretched thing cower in its reluctance to endure

the bath of ecru and ocher and putt-buff-and-snuff that Charlotte planned to give it.

She never got as far as that, thank God, but she did use up a tremendous amount of

energy in washing window shades, waxing the slats of Venetian blinds, purchasing

new shades and new blinds, returning them to the store, replacing them by others,

and so on, in a constant chiaroscuro of smiles and frowns, doubts and pouts. She

dabbled in cretonnes and chintzes; she changed the colors of the sofa--the sacred

sofa where a bubble of paradise had once burst in slow motion within me. She

rearranged the furniture--and was pleased when she found, in a household treatise,

that "it is permissible to separate a pair of sofa commodes and their companion

lamps." With the authoress of Your Home Is You, she developed a hatred for little

lean chairs and spindle tables. She believed that a room having a generous expanse

of glass, and lots of rich wood paneling was an example of the masculine type of

room, whereas the feminine type was characterized by lighter-looking windows and

frailer woodwork. The novels I had found her reading when I moved in were now

replaced by illustrated catalogues and homemaking guides. From a firm located at

4640 Roosevelt Blvd., Philadelphia, she ordered for our double bed a "damask

covered 312 coil mattress"--although the old one seemed to me resilient and durable

enough for whatever it had to support. A Midwesterner, as her late husband had also

been, she had lived in coy Ramsdale, the gem of an eastern state, not long enough

to know all the nice people. She knew slightly the jovial dentist who lived in a kind of

ramshackle wooden chateau behind our lawn. She had met at a church tea the

"snooty" wife of the local junk dealer who owned the "colonial" white horror at the

corner of the avenue. Now and then she "visited with" old Miss Opposite; but the

more patrician matrons among those she called upon, or met at lawn functions, or

had telephone chats with--such dainty ladies as Mrs. Glave, Mrs. Sheridan, Mrs.

McCrystal, Mrs. Knight and others, seldom seemed to call on my neglected Charlotte.

Indeed, the only couple with whom she had relations of real cordiality, devoid of any

arrihre-pensie or practical foresight, were the Farlows who had just come back from

a business trip to Chile in time to attend our wedding, with the Chatfields, McCoos,

and a few others (but not Mrs. Junk or the even prouder Mrs. Talbot). John Farlow

was a middle-aged, quiet, quietly athletic, quietly successful dealer in sporting

goods, who had an office at Parkington, forty miles away: it was he who got me the

cartridges for that Colt and showed me how to use it, during a walk in the woods one

Sunday; he was also what he called with a smile a part-time lawyer and had handled

some of Charlotte's affairs. Jean, his youngish wife (and first cousin), was a long-

limbed girl in harlequin glasses with two boxer dogs, two pointed breasts and a big

red mouth. She painted--landscapes and portraits--and vividly do I remember

praising, over cocktails, the picture she had made of a niece of hers, little Rosaline

Honeck, a rosy honey in a Girl Scout uniform, beret of green worsted, belt of green

webbing, charming shoulder-long curls--and John removed his pipe and said it was a

pity Dolly (my Dolita) and Rosaline were so critical of each other at school, but he

hoped, and we all hoped, they would get on better when they returned from their

respective camps. We talked of the school. It had its drawbacks, and it had its

virtues. "Of course, too many of the tradespeople here are Italians," said John, "but

on the other hand we are still spared--" "I wish," interrupted Jean with a laugh,

"Dolly and Rosaline were spending the summer together." Suddenly I imagined Lo

returning from camp--brown, warm, drowsy, drugged--and was ready to weep with

passion and impatience.



19

A few words more about Mrs. Humbert while the going is good (a bad accident is to

happen quite soon). I had been always aware of the possessive streak in her, but I

never thought she would be so crazily jealous of anything in my life that had not

been she. She showed a fierce insatiable curiosity for my past. She desired me to

resuscitate all my loves so that she might make me insult them, and trample upon

them, and revoke them apostately and totally, thus destroying my past. She made

me tell her about my marriage to Valeria, who was of course a scream; but I also

had to invent, or to pad atrociously, a long series of mistresses for Charlotte's

morbid delectation. To keep her happy, I had to present her with an illustrated

catalogue of them, all nicely differentiated, according to the rules of those American

ads where schoolchildren are pictured in a subtle ratio of races, with one--only one,

but as cute as they make them--chocolate-colored round-eyed little lad, almost in

the very middle of the front row. So I presented my women, and had them smile and

sway--the languorous blond, the fiery brunette, the sensual copperhead--as if on

parade in a bordello. The more popular and platitudinous I made them, the more

Mrs. Humbert was pleased with the show. Never in my life had I confessed so much

or received so many confessions. The sincerity and artlessness with which she

discussed what she called her "love-life," from first necking to connubial catch-as-

catch-can, were, ethically, in striking contrast with my glib compositions, but

technically the two sets were congeneric since both were affected by the same stuff

(soap operas, psychoanalysis and cheap novelettes) upon which I drew for my

characters and she for her mode of expression. I was considerably amused by

certain remarkable sexual habits that the good Harold Haze had had according to

Charlotte who thought my mirth improper; but otherwise her autobiography was as

devoid of interests as her autopsy would have been. I never saw a healthier woman

than she, despite thinning diets. Of my Lolita she seldom spoke--more seldom, in

fact, than she did of the blurred, blond male baby whose photograph to the exclusion

of all others adorned our bleak bedroom. In once of her tasteless reveries, she

predicted that the dead infant's soul would return to earth in the form of the child

she would bear in her present wedlock. And although I felt no special urge to supply

the Humbert line with a replica of Harold's production (Lolita, with an incestuous

thrill, I had grown to regard as my child), it occurred to me that a prolonged

confinement, with a nice Cesarean operation and other complications in a safe

maternity ward sometime next spring, would give me a chance to be alone with my

Lolita for weeks, perhaps--and gorge the limp nymphet with sleeping pills. Oh, she

simply hated her daughter! What I thought especially vicious was that she had gone

out of her way to answer with great diligence the questionnaires in a fool's book she

had (A guide to Your Child's Development), published in Chicago. The rigmarole went

year by year, and Mom was supposed to fill out a kind of inventory at each of her

child's birthdays. On Lo's twelfth, January 1, 1947, Charlotte Haze, nie Becker, had

underlined the following epithets, ten out of forty, under "Your Child's Personality":

aggressive, boisterous, critical, distrustful, impatient, irritable, inquisitive, listless,

negativistic (underlined twice) and obstinate. She had ignored the thirty remaining

adjectives, among which were cheerful, co-operative, energetic, and so forth. It was

really maddening. With a brutality that otherwise never appeared in my loving wife's

mild nature, she attacked and routed such of Lo's little belongings that had wandered

to various parts of the house to freeze there like so many hypnotized bunnies. Little

did the good lady dream that one morning when an upset stomach (the result of my

trying to improve on her sauces) had prevented me from accompanying her to

church, I deceived her with one of Lolita's anklets. And then, her attitude toward my

saporous darling's letters! "Dear Mummy and Hummy, Hope you are fine. Thank you

very much for the candy. I [crossed out and re-written again] I lost my new sweater

in the woods. It has been cold here for the last few days. I'm having a time. Love,

Dolly." "The dumb child," said Mrs. Humbert, "has left out a word before 'time.' That

sweater was all-wool, and I wish you would not send her candy without consulting

me."



20

There was a woodlake (Hourglass Lake--not as I had thought it was spelled) a few

miles from Ramsdale, and there was one week of great heat at the end of July when

we drove there daily. I am now obliged to describe in some tedious detail our last

swim there together, one tropical Tuesday morning. We had left the car in a parking

area not far from the road and were making our way down a path cut through the

pine forest to the lake, when Charlotte remarked that Jean Farlow, in quest of rare

light effects (Jean belonged to the old school of painting), had seen Leslie taking a

dip "in the ebony" (as John had quipped) at five o'clock in the morning last Sunday.

"The water," I said, "must have been quite cold." "That is not the point," said the

logical doomed dear. "He is subnormal, you see. And," she continued (in that

carefully phrased way of hers that was beginning to tell on my health), "I have a

very definite feeling our Louise is in love with that moron." Feeling. "We feel Dolly is

not doing as well" etc. (from an old school report). The Humberts walked on,

sandaled and robed. "Do you know, Hum: I have one most ambitious dream,"

pronounced Lady Hum, lowering her head--shy of that dream--and communing with

the tawny ground. "I would love to get hold of a real trained servant maid like that

German girl the Talbots spoke of; and have her live in the house." "No room," I said.

"Come," she said with her quizzical smile, "surely, chiri, you underestimate the

possibilities of the Humbert home. We would put her in Lo's room. I intended to

make a guestroom of that hole anyway. It's the coldest and meanest in the whole

house." "What are you talking about?" I asked, the skin of my cheekbones tensing

up (this I take the trouble to note only because my daughter's skin did the same

when she felt that way: disbelief, disgust, irritation). "Are you bothered by Romantic

Associations?" queried my wife--in allusion to her first surrender. "Hell no," said I. "I

just wonder where will you put your daughter when you get your guest or your

maid." "Ah," said Mrs. Humbert, dreaming, smiling, drawing out the "Ah"

simultaneously with the raise of one eyebrow and a soft exhalation of breath. "Little

Lo, I'm afraid, does not enter the picture at all, at all. Little Lo goes straight from

camp to a good boarding school with strict discipline and some sound religious

training. And then--Beardsley College. I have it all mapped out, you need not worry."

She went on to say that she, Mrs. Humbert, would have to overcome her habitual

sloth and write to Miss Phalli's sister who taught at St. Algebra. The dazzling lake

emerged. I said I had forgotten my sunglasses in the car and would catch up with

her. I had always thought that wringing one's hands was a fictional gesture--the

obscure outcome, perhaps, of some medieval ritual; but as I took to the woods, for a

spell of despair and desperate meditation, this was the gesture ("look, Lord, at these

chains!") that would have come nearest to the mute expression of my mood. Had

Charlotte been Valeria, I would have known how to handle the situation; and

"handle" is the word I want. In the good old days, by merely twisting fat Valechka's

brittle wrist (the one she had fallen upon from a bicycle) I could make her change

her mind instantly; but anything of the sort in regard to Charlotte was unthinkable.

Bland American Charlotte frightened me. My lighthearted dream of controlling her

through her passion for me was all wrong. I dared not do anything to spoil the image

of me she had set up to adore. I had toadied to her when she was the awesome

duenna of my darling, and a groveling something still persisted in my attitude toward

her. The only ace I held was her ignorance of my monstrous love for her Lo. She had

been annoyed by Lo's liking me; but my feelings she could not divine. To Valeria I

might have said: "Look here, you fat fool, c'est moi qui dicide what is good for

Dolores Humbert." To Charlotte, I could not even say (with ingratiating calm):

"Excuse me, my dear, I disagree. Let us give the child one more chance. Let me be

her private tutor for a year or so. You once told me yourself--" In fact, I could not

say anything at all to Charlotte about the child without giving myself away. Oh, you

cannot imagine (as I had never imagined) what these women of principle are!

Charlotte, who did not notice the falsity of all the everyday conventions and rules of

behavior, and foods, and books, and people she doted upon, would distinguish at

once a false intonation in anything I might say with a view to keeping Lo near. She

was like a musician who may be an odious vulgarian in ordinary life, devoid of tact

and taste; but who will hear a false note in music with diabolical accuracy of

judgment. To break Charlotte's will, I would have to break her heart. If I broke her

heart, her image of me would break too. If I said: "Either I have my way with Lolita,

and you help me to keep the matter quiet, or we part at once," she would have

turned as pale as a woman of clouded glass and slowly replied: "All right, whatever

you add or retract, this is the end." And the end it would be. Such, then, was the

mess. I remember reaching the parking area and pumping a handful of rust-tasting

water, and drinking it as avidly as if it would give me magic wisdom, youth, freedom,

a tiny concubine. For a while, purple-robed, heel-dangling, I sat on the edge of one

of the rude tables, under the whooshing pines. In the middle distance, two little

maidens in shorts and halters came out of a sun-dappled privy marked "Women."

Gum-chewing Mabel (or Mabel's understudy) laboriously, absentmindedly straddled a

bicycle, and Marion, shaking her hair because of the flies, settled behind, legs wide

apart; and wobbling, they slowly, absently, merged with the light and shade. Lolita!

Father and daughter melting into these woods! The natural solution was to destroy

Mrs. Humbert. But how? No man can bring about the perfect murder; chance,

however, can do it. There was the famous dispatch of a Mme Lacour in Arles,

southern France, at the close of last century. An unidentified bearded six-footer,

who, it was later conjectured, had been the lady's secret lover, walked up to her in a

crowded street, soon after her marriage to Colonel Lacour, and mortally stabbed her

in the back, three times, while the Colonel, a small bulldog of a man, hung onto the

murderer's arm. By a miraculous and beautiful coincidence, right at the moment

when the operator was in the act of loosening the angry little husband's jaws (while

several onlookers were closing in upon the group), a cranky Italian in the house

nearest to the scene set off by sheer accident some kind of explosive he was

tinkering with, and immediately the street was turned into a pandemonium of

smoke, falling bricks and running people. The explosion hurt no one (except that it

knocked out game Colonel Lacour); but the lady's vengeful lover ran when the others

ran--and lived happily ever after. Now look what happens when the operator himself

plans a perfect removal. I walked down to Hourglass Lake. The spot from which we

and a few other "nice" couples (the Farlows, the Chatfields) bathed was a kind of

small cove; my Charlotte liked it because it was almost "a private beach." The main

bathing facilities (or drowning facilities" as the Ramsdale Journal had had occasion to

say) were in the left (eastern) part of the hourglass, and could not be seen from our

covelet. To our right, the pines soon gave way to a curve of marshland which turned

again into forest on the opposite side. I sat down beside my wife so noiselessly that

she started. "Shall we go in?" she asked. "We shall in a minute. Let me follow a train

of thought." I thought. More than a minute passed. "All right. Come on." "Was I on

that train?" "You certainly were." "I hope so," said Charlotte entering the water. It

soon reached the gooseflesh of her thick thighs; and then, joining her outstretched

hands, shutting her mouth tight, very plain-faced in her black rubber headgear,

charlotte flung herself forward with a great splash. Slowly we swam out into the

shimmer of the lake. On the opposite bank, at least a thousand paces away (if one

cold walk across water), I could make out the tiny figures of two men working like

beavers on their stretch of shore. I knew exactly who they were: a retired policeman

of Polish descent and the retired plumber who owned most of the timber on that side

of the lake. And I also knew they were engaged in building, just for the dismal fun of

the thing, a wharf. The knocks that reached us seemed so much bigger than what

could be distinguished of those dwarfs' arms and tools; indeed, one suspected the

director of those acrosonic effects to have been at odds with the puppet-master,

especially since the hefty crack of each diminutive blow lagged behind its visual

version. The short white-sand strip of "our" beach--from which by now we had gone

a little way to reach deep water--was empty on weekday mornings. There was

nobody around except those two tiny very busy figures on the opposite side, and a

dark-red private plane that droned overhead, and then disappeared in the blue. The

setting was really perfect for a brisk bubbling murder, and here was the subtle point:

the man of law and the man of water were just near enough to witness an accident

and just far enough not to observe a crime. They were near enough to hear a

distracted bather thrashing about and bellowing for somebody to come and help him

save his drowning wife; and they were too far to distinguish (if they happened to

look too soon) that the anything but distracted swimmer was finishing to tread his

wife underfoot. I was not yet at that stage; I merely want to convey the ease of the

act, the nicety of the setting! So there was Charlotte swimming on with dutiful

awkwardness (she was a very mediocre mermaid), but not without a certain solemn

pleasure (for was not her merman by her side?); and as I watched, with the stark

lucidity of a future recollection (you know--trying to see things as you will remember

having seen them), the glossy whiteness of her wet face so little tanned despite all

her endeavors, and her pale lips, and her naked convex forehead, and the tight black

cap, and the plump wet neck, I knew that all I had to do was to drop back, take a

deep breath, then grab her by the ankle and rapidly dive with my captive corpse. I

say corpse because surprise, panic and inexperience would cause her to inhale at

once a lethal gallon of lake, while I would be able to hold on for at least a full

minute, open-eyed under water. The fatal gesture passed like the tail of a falling star

across the blackness of the contemplated crime. It was like some dreadful silent

ballet, the male dancer holding the ballerina by her foot and streaking down through

watery twilight. I might come up for a mouthful of air while still holding her down,

and then would dive again as many times as would be necessary, and only when the

curtain came down on her for good, would I permit myself to yell for help. And when

some twenty minutes later the two puppets steadily growing arrived in a rowboat,

one half newly painted, poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or

coronary occlusion, or both, would be standing on her head in the inky ooze, some

thirty feet below the smiling surface of Hourglass Lake. Simple, was it not? But what

d'ye know, folks--I just could not make myself do it! She swam beside me, a trustful

and clumsy seal, and all the logic of passion screamed in my ear: Now is the time!

And, folks, I just couldn't! In silence I turned shoreward and gravely, dutifully, she

also turned, and still hell screamed its counsel, and still I could not make myself

drown the poor, slippery, big-bodied creature. The scream grew more and more

remote as I realized the melancholy fact that neither tomorrow, nor Friday, nor any

other day or night, could I make myself put her to death. Oh, I could visualize myself

slapping Valeria's breasts out of alignment, or otherwise hurting her--and I could see

myself, no less clearly, shooting her lover in the underbelly and making him say

"akh!" and sit down. But I could not kill Charlotte--especially when things were on

the whole not quite as hopeless, perhaps, as they seemed at first wince on that

miserable morning. Were I to catch her by her strong kicking foot; were I to see her

amazed look, hear her awful voice; were I still to go through with the ordeal, her

ghost would haunt me all my life. Perhaps if the year were 1447 instead of 1947 I

might have hoodwinked my gentle nature by administering her some classical poison

from a hollow agate, some tender philter of death. But in our middle-class nosy era it

would not have come off the way it used to in the brocaded palaces of the past.

Nowadays you have to be a scientist if you want to be a killer. No, no, I was neither.

Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, the majority of sex offenders that hanker for some

throbbing, sweet-moaning, physical but not necessarily coital, relation with a girl-

child, are innocuous, inadequate, passive, timid strangers who merely ask the

community to allow them to pursue their practically harmless, so-called aberrant

behavior, their little hot wet private acts of sexual deviation without the police and

society cracking down upon them. We are not sex fiends! We do not rape as good

soldiers do. We are unhappy, mild, dog-eyed gentlemen, sufficiently well integrated

to control our urge in the presence of adults, but ready to give years and years of life

for one chance to touch a nymphet. Emphatically, no killers are we. Poets never kill.

Oh, my poor Charlotte, do not hate me in your eternal heaven among an eternal

alchemy of asphalt and rubber and metal and stone--but thank God, not water, not

water! Nonetheless it was a very close shave, speaking quite objectively. And now

comes the point of my perfect-crime parable. We sat down on our towels in the

thirsty sun. She looked around, loosened her bra, and turned over on her stomach to

give her back a chance to be feasted upon. She said she loved me. She sighed

deeply. She extended one arm and groped in the pocket of her robe for her

cigarettes. She sat up and smoked. She examined her right shoulder. She kissed me

heavily with open smoky mouth. Suddenly, down the sand bank behind us, from

under the bushes and pines, a stone rolled, then another. "Those disgusting prying

kids," said Charlotte, holding up her big bra to her breast and turning prone again. "I

shall have to speak about that to Peter Krestovski." From the debouchment of the

trail came a rustle, a footfall, and Jean Farlow marched down with her easel and

things. "You scared us," said Charlotte. Jean said she had been up there, in a place

of green concealment, spying on nature (spies are generally shot), trying to finish a

lakescape, but it was no good, she had no talent whatever (which was quite true)--

"And have you ever tried painting, Humbert?" Charlotte, who was a little jealous of

Jean, wanted to know if John was coming. He was. He was coming home for lunch

today. He had dropped her on the way to Parkington and should be picking her up

any time now. It was a grand morning. She always felt a traitor to Cavall and

Melampus for leaving them roped on such gorgeous days. She sat down on the white

sand between Charlotte and me. She wore shorts. Her long brown legs were about

as attractive to me as those of a chestnut mare. She showed her gums when she

smiled. "I almost put both of you into my lake," she said. "I even noticed something

you overlooked. You [addressing Humbert] had your wrist watch on in, yes, sir, you

had." "Waterproof," said Charlotte softly, making a fish mouth. Jean took my wrist

upon her knee and examined Charlotte's gift, then put back Humbert's hand on the

sand, palm up. "You could see anything that way," remarked Charlotte coquettishly.

Jean sighed. "I once saw," she said, "two children, male and female, at sunset, right

here, making love. Their shadows were giants. And I told you about Mr. Tomson at

daybreak. Next time I expect to see fat old Ivor in the ivory. He is really a freak, that

man. Last time he told me a completely indecent story about his nephew. It appears-

-" "Hullo there," said John's voice.



21

My habit of being silent when displeased or, more exactly, the cold and scaly quality

of my displeased silence, used to frighten Valeria out of her wits. She used to

whimper and wail, saying "Ce qui me rend folle, c'est que je ne sais yu quoi tu

penses quand tu es comme ga." I tried being silent with Charlotte--and she just

chirped on, or chucked my silence under the chin. An astonishing woman! I would

retire to my former room, now a regular "studio," mumbling I had after all a learned

opus to write, and cheerfully Charlotte went on beautifying the home, warbling on

the telephone and writing letters. From my window, through the lacquered shiver of

poplar leaves, I could see her crossing the street and contentedly mailing her letter

to Miss Phalen's sister. The week of scattered showers and shadows which elapsed

after our last visit to the motionless sands of Hourglass Lake was one of the

gloomiest I can recall. Then came two or three dim rays of hope--before the ultimate

sunburst. It occurred to me that I had a fine brain in beautiful working order and

that I might as well use it. If I dared not meddle with my wife's plans for her

daughter (getting warmer and browner every day in the fair weather of hopeless

distance), I could surely devise some general means to assert myself in a general

way that might be later directed toward a particular occasion. One evening, Charlotte

herself provided me with an opening. "I have a surprise for you," she said looking at

me with fond eyes over a spoonful of soup. "In the fall we two are going to England."

I swallowed my spoonful, wiped my lips with pink paper (Oh, the cool rich linens of

Mirana Hotel!) and said: "I have also a surprise for you, my dear. We two are not

going to England." "Why, what's the matter?" she said, looking--with more surprise

than I had counted upon--at my hands (I was involuntarily folding and tearing and

crushing and tearing again the innocent pink napkin). My smiling face set her

somewhat at ease, however. "The matter is quite simple," I replied. "Even in the

most harmonious of households, as ours is, not all decisions are taken by the female

partner. There are certain things that the husband is there to decide. I can well

imagine the thrill that you, a healthy American gal, must experience at crossing the

Atlantic on the same ocean liner with Lady Bumble--or Sam Bumble, the Frozen Meat

King, or a Hollywood harlot. And I doubt not that you and I would make a pretty ad

for the Traveling Agency when portrayed looking--you, frankly starry-eyed, I,

controlling my envious admiration--at the Palace Sentries, or Scarlet Guards, or

Beaver Eaters, or whatever they are called. But I happen to be allergic to Europe,

including merry old England. As you well know, I have nothing but very sad

associations with the Old and rotting World. No colored ads in your magazines will

change the situation." "My darling," said Charlotte. "I really--" "No, wait a minute.

The present matter is only incidental. I am concerned with a general trend. When

you wanted me to spend my afternoons sunbathing on the Lake instead of doing my

work, I gladly gave in and became a bronzed glamour boy for your sake, instead of

remaining a scholar and, well, an educator. When you lead me to bridge and

bourbon with the charming Farlows, I meekly follow. No, please, wait. When you

decorate your home, I do not interfere with your schemes. When you decide--when

you decide all kinds of matters, I may be in complete, or in partial, let us say,

disagreement--but I say nothing. I ignore the particular. I cannot ignore the general.

I love being bossed by you, but every game has its rules. I am not cross. I am not

cross at all. Don't do that. But I am one half of this household, and have a small but

distinct voice." She had come to my side and had fallen on her knees and was

slowly, but very vehemently, shaking her head and clawing at my trousers. She said

she had never realized. She said I was her ruler and her god. She said Louise had

gone, and let us make love right away. She said I must forgive her or she would die.

This little incident filled me with considerable elation. I told her quietly that it was a

matter not of asking forgiveness, but of changing one's ways; and I resolved to

press my advantage and spend a good deal of time, aloof and moody, working at my

book--or at least pretending to work. The "studio bed" in my former room had long

been converted into the sofa it had always been at heart, and Charlotte had warned

me since the very beginning of our cohabitation that gradually the room would be

turned into a regular "writer's den." A couple of days after the British Incident, I was

sitting in a new and very comfortable easy chair, with a large volume in my lap,

when Charlotte rapped with her ring finger and sauntered in. How different were her

movements from those of my Lolita, when she used to visit me in her dear dirty blue

jeans, smelling of orchards in nymphetland; awkward and fey, and dimly depraved,

the lower buttons of her shirt unfastened. Let me tell you, however, something.

Behind the brashness of little Haze, and the poise of big Haze, a trickle of shy life ran

that tasted the same, that murmured the same. A great French doctor once told my

father that in near relatives the faintest gastric gurgle has the same "voice." So

Charlotte sauntered in. She felt all was not well between us. I had pretended to fall

asleep the night before, and the night before that, as soon as we had gone to bed,

and had risen at dawn. Tenderly, she inquired if she were not "interrupting." "Not at

the moment," I said, turning volume C of the Girls' Encyclopedia around to examine

a picture printed "bottom-edge" as printers say. Charlotte went up to a little table of

imitation mahogany with a drawer. She put her hand upon it. The little table was

ugly, no doubt, but it had done nothing to her. "I have always wanted to ask you,"

she said (businesslike, not coquettish), "why is this thing locked up? Do you want it

in this room? It's so abominably uncouth." "Leave it alone," I said. I was Camping in

Scandinavia. "Is there a key?" "Hidden." "Oh, Hum . . . " "Locked up love letters."

She gave me one of those wounded-doe looks that irritated me so much, and then,

not quite knowing if I was serious, or how to keep up the conversation, stood for

several slow pages (Campus, Canada, Candid Camera, Candy) peering at the window

pane rather than through it, drumming upon it with sharp almond-and-rose

fingernails. Presently (at Canoeing or Canvasback) she strolled up to my chair and

sank down, tweedily, weightily, on its arm, inundating me with the perfume my first

wife had used. "Would his lordship like to spend the fall here?" she asked, pointing

with her little finger at an autumn view in a conservative Eastern State. "Why?"

(very distinctly and slowly). She shrugged. (Probably Harold used to take a vacation

at that time. Open season. Conditional reflex on her part.) "I think I know where that

is," she said, still pointing. "There is a hotel I remember, Enchanted Hunters, quaint,

isn't it? And the food is a dream. And nobody bothers anybody." She rubbed her

cheek against my temple. Valeria soon got over that. "Is there anything special you

would like for dinner, dear? John and Jean will drop in later." I answered with a

grunt. She kissed me on my underlip, and, brightly saying she would bake a cake (a

tradition subsisted from my lodging days that I adored her cakes), left me to my

idleness. Carefully putting down the open book where she had sat (it attempted to

send forth a rotation of waves, but an inserted pencil stopped the pages), I checked

the hiding place of the key: rather self-consciously it lay under the old expensive

safety razor I had used before she bought me a much better and cheaper one. Was it

the perfect hiding place--there, under the razor, in the groove of its velvet-lined

case? The case lay in a small trunk where I kept various business papers. Could I

improve upon this? Remarkable how difficult it is to conceal things--especially when

one's wife keeps monkeying with the furniture.



22

I think it was exactly a week after our last swim that the noon mail brought a reply

from the second Miss Phalen. The lady wrote she had just returned to St. Algebra

from her sister's funeral. "Euphemia had never been the same after breaking that

hip." As to the matter of Mrs. Humbert's daughter, she wished to report that it was

too late to enroll her this year; but that she, the surviving Phalen, was practically

certain that if Mr. and Mrs. Humbert brought Dolores over in January, her admittance

might be arranged. Next day, after lunch, I went to see "our" doctor, a friendly

fellow whose perfect bedside manner and complete reliance on a few patented drugs

adequately masked his ignorance of, and indifference to, medical science. The fact

that Lo would have to come back to Ramsdale was a treasure of anticipation. For this

event I wanted to be fully prepared. I had in fact begun my campaign earlier, before

Charlotte made that cruel decision of hers. I had to be sure when my lovely child

arrived, that very night, and then night after night, until St. Algebra took her away

from me, I would possess the means of putting two creatures to sleep so thoroughly

that neither sound nor touch should rouse them. Throughout most of July I had been

experimenting with various sleeping powders, trying them out on Charlotte, a great

taker of pills. The last dose I had given her (she thought it was a tablet of mild

bromides--to anoint her nerves) had knocked her out for four solid hours. I had put

the radio at full blast. I had blazed in her face an olisbos-like flashlight. I had pushed

her, pinched her, prodded her--and nothing had disturbed the rhythm of her calm

and powerful breathing. However, when I had done such a simple thing as kiss her,

she had awakened at once, as fresh and strong as an octopus (I barely escaped).

This would not do, I thought; had to get something still safer. At first, Dr. Byron did

not seem to believe me when I said his last prescription was no match for my

insomnia. He suggested I try again, and for a moment diverted my attention by

showing me photographs of his family. He had a fascinating child of Dolly's age; but

I saw through his tricks and insisted he prescribe the mightiest pill extant. He

suggested I play golf, but finally agreed to give me something that, he said, "would

really work"; and going to a cabinet, he produced a vial of violet-blue capsules

banded with dark purple at one end, which, he said, had just been placed on the

market and were intended not for neurotics whom a draft of water could calm if

properly administered, but only for great sleepless artists who had to die for a few

hours in order to live for centuries. I love to fool doctors, and though inwardly

rejoicing, pocketed the pills with a skeptical shrug. Incidentally, I had had to be

careful with him. Once, in another connection, a stupid lapse on my part made me

mention my last sanatorium, and I thought I saw the tips of his ears twitch. Being

not at all keen for Charlotte or anybody else to know that period of my past, I had

hastily explained that I had once done some research among the insane for a novel.

But no matter; the old rogue certainly had a sweet girleen. I left in great spirits.

Steering my wife's car with one finger, I contentedly rolled homeward. Ramsdale

had, after all, lots of charm. The cicadas whirred; the avenue had been freshly

watered. Smoothly, almost silkily, I turned down into our steep little street.

Everything was somehow so right that day. So blue and green. I knew the sun shone

because my ignition key was reflected in the windshield; and I knew it was exactly

half past three because the nurse who came to massage Miss Opposite every

afternoon was tripping down the narrow sidewalk in her white stockings and shoes.

As usual, Junk's hysterical setter attacked me as I rolled downhill, and as usual, the

local paper was lying on the porch where it had just been hurled by Kenny. The day

before I had ended the regime of aloofness I had imposed upon myself, and now

uttered a cheerful homecoming call as I opened the door of the living room. With her

ream-white nape and bronze bun to me, wearing the yellow blouse and maroon

slacks she had on when I first met her, Charlotte sat at the corner bureau writing a

letter. My hand still on the doorknob, I repeated my hearty cry. Her writing hand

stopped. She sat still for a moment; then she slowly turned in her chair and rested

her elbow on its curved back. Her face, disfigured by her emotion, was not a pretty

sight as she stared at my legs and said: "The Haze woman, the big bitch, the old cat,

the obnoxious mamma, the--the old stupid Haze is no longer your dupe. She has--

she has . . ." My fair accuser stopped, swallowing her venom and her tears.

Whatever Humbert Humbert said--or attempted to say--is inessential. She went on:

"You're a monster. You're a detestable, abominable, criminal fraud. If you come

near--I'll scream out the window. Get back!" Again, whatever H.H. murmured may

be omitted, I think. "I am leaving tonight. This is all yours. Only you'll never, never

see that miserable brat again. Get out of this room." Reader, I did. I went up to the

ex-semi-studio. Arms akimbo, I stood for a moment quite still and self-composed,

surveying from the threshold the raped little table with its open drawer, a key

hanging from the lock, four other household keys on the table top. I walked across

the landing into the Humberts' bedroom, and calmly removed my diary from under

her pillow into my pocket. Then I started to walk downstairs, but stopped half-way:

she was talking on the telephone which happened to be plugged just outside the

door of the living room. I wanted to hear what she was saying: she canceled an

order for something or other, and returned to the parlor. I rearranged my respiration

and went through the hallway to the kitchen. There, I opened a bottle of Scotch. She

could never resist Scotch. Then I walked into the dining room and from there,

through the half-open door, contemplated Charlotte's broad back. "You are ruining

my life and yours," I said quietly. "Let us be civilized people. It is all your

hallucination. You are crazy, Charlotte. The notes you found were fragments of a

novel. Your name and hers were put in by mere chance. Just because they came

handy. Think it over. I shall bring you a drink." She neither answered nor turned, but

went on writing in a scorching scrawl whatever she was writing. A third letter,

presumably (two in stamped envelopes were already laid out on the desk). I went

back to the kitchen. I set out two glasses (to St. Algebra? to Lo?) and opened the

refrigerator. It roared at me viciously while I removed the ice from its heart. Rewrite.

Let her read it again. She will not recall details. Change, forge. Write a fragment and

show it to her or leave it lying around. Why do faucets sometimes whine so horribly?

A horrible situation, really. The little pillow-shaped blocks of ice--pillows for polar

teddy bear, Lo--emitted rasping, crackling, tortured sounds as the warm water

loosened them in their cells. I bumped down the glasses side by side. I poured in the

whiskey and a dram of soda. She had tabooed my pin. Bark and bang went the

icebox. Carrying the glasses, I walked through the dining room and spoke through

the parlor door which was a fraction ajar, not quite space enough for my elbow. "I

have made you a drink," I said. She did not answer, the mad bitch, and I placed the

glasses on the sideboard near the telephone, which had started to ring. "Leslie

speaking. Leslie Tomson," said Leslie Tomson who favored a dip at dawn. "Mrs.

Humbert, sir, has been run over and you'd better come quick." I answered, perhaps

a bit testily, that my wife was safe and sound, and still holding the receiver, I pushed

open the door and said: "There's this man saying you've been killed, Charlotte." But

there was no Charlotte in the living room.



23

I rushed out. The far side of our steep little street presented a peculiar sight. A big

black glossy Packard had climbed Miss Opposite's sloping lawn at an angle from the

sidewalk (where a tartan laprobe had dropped in a heap), and stood there, shining in

the sun, its doors open like wings, its front wheels deep in evergreen shrubbery. To

the anatomical right of this car, on the trim turn of the lawn-slope, an old gentleman

with a white mustache, well-dressed--double-breasted gray suit, polka-dotted bow-

tie--lay supine, his long legs together, like a death-size wax figure. I have to put the

impact of an instantaneous vision into a sequence of words; their physical

accumulation in the page impairs the actual flash, the sharp unity of impression:

Rug-heap, car, old man-doll, Miss O.'s nurse running with a rustle, a half-empty

tumbler in her hand, back to the screened porch--where the propped-up, imprisoned,

decrepit lady herself may be imagined screeching, but not loud enough to drown the

rhythmical yaps of the Junk setter walking from group to group--from a bunch of

neighbors already collected on the sidewalk, near the bit of checked stuff, and back

to the car which he had finally run to earth, and then to another group on the lawn,

consisting of Leslie, two policemen and a sturdy man with tortoise shell glasses. At

this point, I should explain that the prompt appearance of the patrolmen, hardly

more than a minute after the accident, was due to their having been ticketing the

illegally parked cars in a cross lane two blocks down the grade; that the fellow with

the glasses was Frederick Beale, Jr., driver of the Packard; that his 79-year-old

father, whom the nurse had just watered on the green bank where he lay--a banked

banker so to speak--was not in a dead faint, but was comfortably and methodically

recovering from a mild heart attack or its possibility; and, finally, that the laprobe on

the sidewalk (where she had so often pointed out to me with disapproval the crooked

green cracks) concealed the mangled remains of Charlotte Humbert who had been

knocked down and dragged several feet by the Beale car as she was hurrying across

the street to drop three letters in the mailbox, at the corner of Miss Opposite's lawn.

These were picked up and handed to me by a pretty child in a dirty pink frock, and I

got rid of them by clawing them to fragments in my trouser pocket. Three doctors

and the Farlows presently arrived on the scene and took over. The widower, a man

of exceptional self-control, neither wept nor raved. He staggered a bit, that he did;

but he opened his mouth only to impart such information or issue such directions as

were strictly necessary in connection with the identification, examination and

disposal of a dead woman, the top of her head a porridge of bone, brains, bronze

hair and blood. The sun was still a blinding red when he was put to bed in Dolly's

room by his two friends, gentle John and dewy-eyed Jean; who, to be near, retired

to the Humberts' bedroom for the night; which, for all I know, they may not have

spent as innocently as the solemnity of the occasion required. I have no reason to

dwell, in this very special memoir, on the pre-funeral formalities that had to be

attended to, or on the funeral itself, which was as quiet as the marriage had been.

But a few incidents pertaining to those four or five days after Charlotte's simple

death, have to be noted. My first night of widowhood I was so drunk that I slept as

soundly as the child who had slept in that bed. Next morning I hastened to inspect

the fragments of letters in my pocket. They had got too thoroughly mixed up to be

sorted into three complete sets. I assumed that ". . . and you had better find it

because I cannot buy . . . " came from a letter to Lo; and other fragments seemed to

point to Charlotte's intention of fleeing with Lo to Parkington, or even back to Pisky,

lest the vulture snatch her precious lamb. Other tatters and shreds (never had I

thought I had such strong talons) obviously referred to an application not to St. A.

but to another boarding school which was said to be so harsh and gray and gaunt in

its methods (although supplying croquet under the elms) as to have earned the

nickname of "Reformatory for Young Ladies." Finally, the third epistle was obviously

addressed to me. I made out such items as ". . . after a year of separation we may .

. . " ". . . oh, my dearest, oh my . . . " ". . . worse than if it had been a woman you

kept . . ." ". . . or, maybe, I shall die . . ." But on the whole my gleanings made little

sense; the various fragments of those three hasty missives were as jumbled in the

palms of my hands as their elements had been in poor Charlotte's head. That day

John had to see a customer, and Jean had to feed her dogs, and so I was to be

deprived temporarily of my friends' company. The dear people were afraid I might

commit suicide if left alone, and since no other friends were available (Miss Opposite

was incommunicado, the McCoos were busy building a new house miles away, and

the Chatfields had been recently called to Maine by some family trouble of their

own), Leslie and Louise were commissioned to keep me company under the pretense

of helping me to sort out and pack a multitude of orphaned things. In a moment of

superb inspiration I showed the kind and credulous Farlows (we were waiting for

Leslie to come for his paid tryst with Louise) a little photograph of Charlotte I had

found among her affairs. From a boulder she smiled through blown hair. It had been

taken in April 1934, a memorable spring. While on a business visit to the States, I

had had occasion to spend several months in Pisky. We met--and had a mad love

affair. I was married, alas, and she was engaged to Haze, but after I returned to

Europe, we corresponded through a friend, now dead. Jean whispered she had heard

some rumors and looked at the snapshot, and, still looking, handed it to John, and

John removed his pipe and looked at lovely and fast Charlotte Becker, and handed it

back to me. Then they left for a few hours. Happy Louise was gurgling and scolding

her swain in the basement. Hardly had the Farlows gone than a blue-chinned cleric

called--and I tried to make the interview as brief as was consistent with neither

hurting his feelings nor arousing his doubts. Yes, I would devote all my life to the

child's welfare. Here, incidentally, was a little cross that Charlotte Becker had given

me when we were both young. I had a female cousin, a respectable spinster in New

York. There we would find a good private school for Dolly. Oh, what a crafty

Humbert! For the benefit of Leslie and Louise who might (and did) report it to John

and Jean I made a tremendously loud and beautifully enacted long-distance call and

simulated a conversation with Shirley Holmes. When John and Jean returned, I

completely took them in by telling them, in a deliberately wild and confused mutter,

that Lo had gone with the intermediate group on a five-day hike and could not be

reached. "Good Lord," said Jean, "what shall we do?" John said it was perfectly

simple--he would get the Climax police to find the hikers--it would not take them an

hour. In fact, he knew the country and-- "Look," he continued, "why don' I drive

there right now, and you may sleep with Jean"--(he did not really add that but Jean

supported his offer so passionately that it might be implied). I broke down. I pleaded

with John to let things remain the way they were. I said I could not bear to have the

child all around me, sobbing, clinging to me, she was so high-strung, the experience

might react on her future, psychiatrists have analyzed such cases. There was a

sudden pause. "Well, you are the doctor," said John a little bluntly. "But after all I

was Charlotte's friend and adviser. One would like to know what you are going to do

about the child anyway." "John," cried Jean, "she is his child, not Harold Haze's.

Don't you understand? Humbert is Dolly's real father." "I see," said John. "I am

sorry. Yes. I see. I did not realize that. It simplifies matters, of course. And whatever

you feel is right." The distraught father went on to say he would go and fetch his

delicate daughter immediately after the funeral, and would do his best to give her a

good time in totally different surroundings, perhaps a trip to New Mexico or

California--granted, of course, he lived. So artistically did I impersonate the calm of

ultimate despair, the hush before some crazy outburst, that the perfect Farlows

removed me to their house. They had a good cellar, as cellars go in this country; and

that was helpful, for I feared insomnia and a ghost. Now I must explain my reasons

for keeping Dolores away. Naturally, at first, when Charlotte had just been

eliminated and I re-entered the house a free father, and gulped down the two

whiskey-and-sodas I had prepared, and topped them with a pint or two of my "pin,"

and went to the bathroom to get away from neighbors and friends, there was but

one thing in my mind and pulse--namely, the awareness that a few hours hence,

warm, brown--haired, and mine, mine, mine, Lolita would be in my arms, shedding

tears that I would kiss away faster than they could well. But as I stood wide-eyed

and flushed before the mirror, John Farlow tenderly tapped to inquire if I was okay--

and I immediately realized it would be madness on my part to have her in the house

with all those busybodies milling around and scheming to take her away from me.

Indeed, unpredictable Lo herself might--who knows?--show some foolish distrust of

me, a sudden repugnance, vague fear and the like--and gone would be the magic

prize at the very instant of triumph. Speaking of busybodies, I had another visitor--

friend Beale, the fellow who eliminated my wife. Stodgy and solemn, looking like a

kind of assistant executioner, with his bulldog jowls, small black eyes, thickly rimmed

glasses and conspicuous nostrils, he was ushered in by John who then left us, closing

the door upon us, with the utmost tact. Suavely saying he had twins in my

stepdaughter's class, my grotesque visitor unrolled a large diagram he had made of

the accident. It was, as my stepdaughter would have put it, "a beaut," with all kinds

of impressive arrows and dotted lines in varicolored inks. Mrs. H.H.'s trajectory was

illustrated at several points by a series of those little outline figures--doll-like wee

career girl or WAC--used in statistics as visual aids. Very clearly and conclusively,

this route came into contact with a boldly traced sinuous line representing two

consecutive swerves--one which the Beale car made to avoid the Junk dog (dog not

shown), and the second, a kind of exaggerated continuation of the first, meant to

avert the tragedy. A very black cross indicated the spot where the trim little outline

figure had at last come to rest on the sidewalk. I looked for some similar mark to

denote the place on the embankment where my visitor's huge wax father had

reclined, but there was none. That gentleman, however, had signed the document as

a witness underneath the name of Leslie Tomson, Miss Opposite and a few other

people. With his hummingbird pencil deftly and delicately flying from one point to

another, Frederick demonstrated his absolute innocence and the recklessness of my

wife: while he was in the act of avoiding the dog, she slipped on the freshly watered

asphalt and plunged forward whereas she should have flung herself not forward but

backward (Fred showed how by a jerk of his padded shoulder). I said it was certainly

not his fault, and the inquest upheld my view. Breathing violently though jet-black

tense nostrils, he shook his head and my hand; then, with an air of perfect savoir

vivre and gentlemanly generosity, he offered to pay the funeral-home expenses. He

expected me to refuse his offer. With a drunken sob of gratitude I accepted it. This

took him aback. Slowly, incredulously, he repeated what he had said. I thanked him

again, even more profusely than before. In result of that weird interview, the

numbness of my soul was for a moment resolved. And no wonder! I had actually

seen the agent of fate. I had palpated the very flesh of fate--and its padded

shoulder. A brilliant and monstrous mutation had suddenly taken place, and here

was the instrument. Within the intricacies of the pattern (hurrying housewife,

slippery pavement, a pest of a dog, steep grade, big car, baboon at its wheel), I

could dimly distinguish my own vile contribution. Had I not been such a fool--or such

an intuitive genius--to preserve that journal, fluids produced by vindictive anger and

hot shame would not have blinded Charlotte in her dash to the mailbox. But even

had they blinded her, still nothing might have happened, had not precise fate, that

synchronizing phantom, mixed within its alembic the car and the dog and the sun

and the shade and the wet and the weak and the strong and the stone. Adieu,

Marlene! Fat fate's formal handshake (as reproduced by Beale before leaving the

room) brought me out of my torpor; and I wept. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury--I

wept.



24

The elms and the poplars were turning their ruffled backs to a sudden onslaught of

wind, and a black thunderhead loomed above Ramsdale's white church tower when I

looked around me for the last time. For unknown adventures I was leaving the livid

house where I had rented a room only ten weeks before. The shades--thrifty,

practical bamboo shades--were already down. On porches or in the house their rich

textures lend modern drama. The house of heaven must seem pretty bare after that.

A raindrop fell on my knuckles. I went back into the house for something or other

while John was putting my bags into the car, and then a funny thing happened. I do

not know if in these tragic notes I have sufficiently stressed the peculiar "sending"

effect that the writer's good looks--pseudo-Celtic, attractively simian, boyishly

manly--had on women of every age and environment. Of course, such

announcements made in the first person may sound ridiculous. But every once in a

while I have to remind the reader of my appearance much as a professional novelist,

who has given a character of his some mannerism or a dog, has to go on producing

that dog or that mannerism every time the character crops up in the course of the

book. There may be more to it in the present case. My gloomy good looks should be

kept in the mind's eye if my story is to be properly understood. Pubescent Lo

swooned to Humbert's charm as she did to hiccuppy music; adult Lotte loved me

with a mature, possessive passion that I now deplore and respect more than I care

to say. Jean Farlow, who was thirty-one and absolutely neurotic, had also apparently

developed a strong liking for me. She was handsome in a carved-Indian sort of way,

with a burnt sienna complexion. Her lips were like large crimson polyps, and when

she emitted her special barking laugh, she showed large dull teeth and pale gums.

She was very tall, wore either slacks with sandals or billowing skirts with ballet

slippers, drank any strong liquor in any amount, had had two miscarriages, wrote

stories about animals, painted, as the reader knows, lakescapes, was already nursing

the cancer that was to kill her at thirty-three, and was hopelessly unattractive to me.

Judge then of my alarm when a few seconds before I left (she and I stood in the

hallway) Jean, with her always trembling fingers, took me by the temples, and, tears

in her bright blue eyes, attempted, unsuccessfully, to glue herself to my lips. "Take

care of yourself," she said, "kiss your daughter for me." A clap of thunder

reverberated throughout the house, and she added: "Perhaps, somewhere, some

day, at a less miserable time, we may see each other again" (Jean, whatever,

wherever you are, in minus time-space or plus soul-time, forgive me all this,

parenthesis included). And presently I was shaking hands with both of them in the

street, the sloping street, and everything was whirling and flying before the

approaching white deluge, and a truck with a mattress from Philadelphia was

confidently rolling down to an empty house, and dust was running and writhing over

the exact slab of stone where Charlotte, when they lifted the laprobe for me, had

been revealed, curled up, her eyes intact, their black lashes still wet, matted, like

yours, Lolita.



25

One might suppose that with all blocks removed and a prospect of delirious and

unlimited delights before me, I would have mentally sunk back, heaving a sigh of

delicious relief. Eh bien, pas du tout! Instead of basking in the beams of smiling

Chance, I was obsessed by all sorts of purely ethical doubts and fears. For instance:

might it not surprise people that Lo was so consistently debarred from attending

festive and funeral functions in her immediate family? You remember--we had not

had her at our wedding. Or another thing: granted it was the long hairy arm of

Coincidence that had reached out to remove an innocent woman, might Coincidence

not ignore in a heathen moment what its twin lamb had done and hand Lo a

premature note of commiseration? True, the accident had been reported only by the

Ramsdale Journal--not by the Parkington Recorder or the Climax Herald, Camp Q

being in another state, and local deaths having no federal news interest; but I could

not help fancying that somehow Dolly Haze had been informed already, and that at

the very time I was on my way to fetch her, she was being driven to Ramsdale by

friends unknown to me. Still more disquieting than all these conjectures and worries,

was the fact that Humbert Humbert, a brand-new American citizen of obscure

European origin, had taken no steps toward becoming the legal guardian of his dead

wife's daughter (twelve years and seven months old). Would I ever dare take those

steps? I could not repress a shiver whenever I imagined my nudity hemmed in by

mysterious statutes in the merciless glare of the Common Law. My scheme was a

marvel of primitive art: I would whizz over to Camp Q, tell Lolita her mother was

about to undergo a major operation at an invented hospital, and then keep moving

with my sleepy nymphet from inn to inn while her mother got better and better and

finally died. But as I traveled campward my anxiety grew. I could not bear to think I

might not find Lolita there--or find, instead, another, scared, Lolita clamoring for

some family friend: not the Farlows, thank God--she hardly knew them--but might

there not be other people I had not reckoned with? Finally, I decided to make the

long-distance call I had simulated so well a few days before. It was raining hard

when I pulled up in a muddy suburb of Parkington, just before the Fork, one prong of

which bypassed the city and led to the highway which crossed the hills to Lake

Climax and Camp Q. I flipped off the ignition and for quite a minute sat in the car

bracing myself for that telephone call, and staring at the rain, at the inundated

sidewalk, at a hydrant: a hideous thing, really, painted a thick silver and red,

extending the red stumps of its arms to be varnished by the rain which like stylized

blood dripped upon its argent chains. No wonder that stopping beside those

nightmare cripples is taboo. I drove up to a gasoline station. A surprise awaited me

when at last the coins had satisfactorily clanked down and a voice was allowed to

answer mine. Holmes, the camp mistress, informed me that Dolly had gone Monday

(this was Wednesday) on a hike in the hills with her group and was expected to

return rather late today. Would I care to come tomorrow, and what was exactly--

Without going into details, I said that her mother was hospitalized, that the situation

was grave, that the child should not be told it was grave and that she should be

ready to leave with me tomorrow afternoon. The two voices parted in an explosion of

warmth and good will, and through some freak mechanical flaw all my coins came

tumbling back to me with a hitting-the-jackpot clatter that almost made me laugh

despite the disappointment at having to postpone bliss. One wonders if this sudden

discharge, this spasmodic refund, was not correlated somehow, in the mind of

McFate, with my having invented that little expedition before ever learning of it as I

did now. What next? I proceeded to the business center of Parkington and devoted

the whole afternoon (the weather had cleared, the wet town was like silver-and-

glass) to buying beautiful things for Lo. Goodness, what crazy purchases were

prompted by the poignant predilection Humbert had in those days for check weaves,

bright cottons, frills, puffed-out short sleeves, soft pleats, snug-fitting bodices and

generously full skirts! Oh Lolita, you are my girl, as Vee was Poe's and Bea Dante's,

and what little girl would not like to whirl in a circular skirt and scanties? Did I have

something special in mind? coaxing voices asked me. Swimming suits? We have

them in all shades. Dream pink, frosted aqua, glans mauve, tulip red, oolala black.

What about playsuits? Slips? No slips. Lo and I loathed slips. One of my guides in

these matters was an anthropometric entry made by her mother on Lo's twelfth

birthday (the reader remembers that Know-Your-Child book). I had the feeling that

Charlotte, moved by obscure motives of envy and dislike, had added an inch here, a

pound there; but since the nymphet had no doubt grown somewhat in the last seven

months, I thought I could safely accept most of those January measurements: hip

girth, twenty-nine inches; thigh girth (just below the gluteal sulcus), seventeen; calf

girth and neck circumference, eleven; chest circumference, twenty-seven; upper arm

girth, eight; waist, twenty-three; stature, fifty-seven inches; weight, seventy-eight

pounds; figure, linear; intelligence quotient, 121; vermiform appendix present, thank

God. Apart from measurements, I could of course visualize Lolita with hallucinational

lucidity; and nursing as I did a tingle on my breastbone at the exact spot her silky

top had come level once or twice with my heart; and feeling as I did her warm

weight in my lap (so that, in a sense, I was always "with Lolita" as a woman is "with

child"), I was not surprised to discover later that my computation had been more or

less correct. Having moreover studied a midsummer sale book, it was with a very

knowing air that I examined various pretty articles, sport shoes, sneakers, pumps of

crushed kid for crushed kids. The painted girl in black who attended to all these

poignant needs of mine turned parental scholarship and precise description into

commercial euphemisms, such as "petite." Another, much older woman, in a white

dress, with a pancake make-up, seemed to be oddly impressed by my knowledge of

junior fashions; perhaps I had a midget for mistress; so, when shown a skirt with

"cute" pockets in front, I intentionally put a naive male question and was rewarded

by a smiling demonstration of the way the zipper worked in the back of the skirt. I

had next great fun with all kinds of shorts and briefs--phantom little Lolitas dancing,

falling, daisying all over the counter. We rounded up the deal with some prim cotton

pajamas in popular butcher-boy style. Humbert, the popular butcher. There is a

touch of the mythological and the enchanted in those large stores where according to

ads a career girl can get a complete desk-to-date wardrobe, and where little sister

can dream of the day when her wool jersey will make the boys in the back row of the

classroom drool. Life-size plastic figures of snubbed-nosed children with dun-colored,

greenish, brown-dotted, faunish faces floated around me. I realized I was the only

shopper in that rather eerie place where I moved about fishlike, in a glaucous

aquarium. I sensed strange thoughts form in the minds of the languid ladies that

escorted me from counter to counter, from rock ledge to seaweed, and the belts and

the bracelets I chose seemed to fall from siren hands into transparent water. I

bought an elegant valise, had my purchases put into it, and repaired to the nearest

hotel, well pleased with my day. Somehow, in connection with that quiet poetical

afternoon of fastidious shopping, I recalled the hotel or inn with the seductive name

of The Enchanted Hunters with Charlotte had happened to mention shortly before my

liberation. With the help of a guidebook I located it in the secluded town of Briceland,

a four-hour drive from Lo's camp. I could have telephoned but fearing my voice

might go out of control and lapse into coy croaks of broken English, I decided to

send a wire ordering a room with twin beds for the next night. What a comic,

clumsy, wavering Prince Charming I was! How some of my readers will laugh at me

when I tell them the trouble I had with the wording of my telegram! What should I

put: Humbert and daughter? Humberg and small daughter? Homberg and immature

girl? Homburg and child? The droll mistake--the "g" at the end--which eventually

came through may have been a telepathic echo of these hesitations of mine. And

then, in the velvet of a summer night, my broodings over the philer I had with me!

Oh miserly Hamburg! Was he not a very Enchanted Hunter as he deliberated with

himself over his boxful of magic ammunition? To rout the monster of insomnia

should he try himself one of those amethyst capsules? There were forty of them, all

told--forty nights with a frail little sleeper at my throbbing side; could I rob myself of

one such night in order to sleep? Certainly not: much too precious was each tiny

plum, each microscopic planetarium with its live stardust. Oh, let me be mawkish for

the nonce! I am so tired of being cynical.



26

This daily headache in the opaque air of this tombal jail is disturbing, but I must

persevere. Have written more than a hundred pages and not got anywhere yet. My

calendar is getting confused. That must have been around August 15, 1947. Don't

think I can go on. Heart, head--everything. Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita,

Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita. Repeat till the page is full, printer.



27

Still in Parkington. Finally, I did achieve an hour's slumber--from which I was

aroused by gratuitous and horribly exhausting congress with a small hairy

hermaphrodite, a total stranger. By then it was six in the morning, and it suddenly

occurred to me it might be a good thing to arrive at the camp earlier than I had said.

From Parkington I had still a hundred miles to go, and there would be more than that

to the Hazy Hills and Briceland. If I had said I would come for Dolly in the afternoon,

it was only because my fancy insisted on merciful night falling as soon as possible

upon my impatience. But now I foresaw all kinds of misunderstandings and was all a-

jitter lest delay might give her the opportunity of some idle telephone call to

Ramsdale. However, when at 9.30 a.m. I attempted to start, I was confronted by a

dead battery, and noon was nigh when at last I left Parkington. I reached my

destination around half past two; parked my car in a pine grove where a green-

shirted, redheaded impish lad stood throwing horseshoes in sullen solitude; was

laconically directed by him to an office in a stucco cottage; in a dying state, had to

endure for several minutes the inquisitive commiseration of the camp mistress, a

sluttish worn out female with rusty hair. Dolly she said was all packed and ready to

go. She knew her mother was sick but not critically. Would Mr. Haze, I mean, Mr.

Humbert, care to meet the camp counselors? Or look at the cabins where the girls

live? Each dedicated to a Disney creature? Or visit the Lodge? Or should Charlie be

sent over to fetch her? The girls were just finishing fixing the Dining Room for a

dance. (And perhaps afterwards she would say to somebody or other: "The poor guy

looked like his own ghost.") Let me retain for a moment that scene in all its trivial

and fateful detail: hag Holmes writing out a receipt, scratching her head, pulling a

drawer out of her desk, pouring change into my impatient palm, then neatly

spreading a banknote over it with a bright ". . . and five!"; photographs of girl-

children; some gaudy moth or butterfly, still alive, safely pinned to the wall ("nature

study"); the framed diploma of the camp's dietitian; my trembling hands; a card

produced by efficient Holmes with a report of Dolly Haze's behavior for July ("fair to

good; keen on swimming and boating"); a sound of trees and birds, and my

pounding heart . . . I was standing with my back to the open door, and then I felt

the blood rush to my head as I heart her respiration and voice behind me. She

arrived dragging and bumping her heavy suitcase. "Hi!" she said, and stood still,

looking at me with sly, glad eyes, her soft lips parted in a slightly foolish but

wonderfully endearing smile. She was thinner and taller, and for a second it seemed

to me her face was less pretty than the mental imprint I had cherished for more than

a month: her cheeks looked hollowed and too much lentigo camouflaged her rosy

rustic features; and that first impression (a very narrow human interval between two

tiger heartbeats) carried the clear implication that all widower Humbert had to do,

wanted to do, or would do, was to give this wan-looking though sun-colored little

orphan au yeux battus (and even those plumbaceous umbrae under her eyes bore

freckles) a sound education, a healthy and happy girlhood, a clean home, nice girl-

friends of her age among whom (if the fates deigned to repay me) I might find,

perhaps, a pretty little Magdlein for Herr Doktor Humbert alone. But "in a wink," as

the Germans say, the angelic line of conduct was erased, and I overtook my prey

(time moves ahead of our fancies!), and she was my Lolita again--in fact, more of

my Lolita than ever. I let my hand rest on her warm auburn head and took up her

bag. She was all rose and honey, dressed in her brightest gingham, with a pattern of

little red apples, and her arms and legs were of a deep golden brown, with scratches

like tiny dotted lines of coagulated rubies, and the ribbed cuffs of her white socks

were turned down at the remembered level, and because of her childish gait, or

because I had memorized her as always wearing heelless shoes, her saddle oxfords

looked somehow too large and too high-heeled for her. Good-bye, Camp Q, merry

Camp Q. Good-bye, plain unwholesome food, good-bye Charlie boy. In the hot car

she settled down beside me, slapped a prompt fly on her lovely knee; then, her

mouth working violently on a piece of chewing gum, she rapidly cranked down the

window on her side and settled back again. We sped through the striped and

speckled forest. "How's Mother?" she asked dutifully. I said the doctors did not quite

know yet what the trouble was. Anyway, something abdominal. Abominable? No,

abdominal. We would have to hang around for a while. The hospital was in the

country, near the gay town of Lepingville, where a great poet had resided in the

early nineteenth century and where we would take in all the shows. She thought it a

peachy idea and wondered if we could make Lepingville before nine p.m. "We should

be at Briceland by dinner time," I said, "and tomorrow we'll visit Lepingville. How

was the hike? Did you have a marvelous time at the camp?" "Uh-huh." "Sorry to

leave?" "Un-un." "Talk, Lo--don't grunt. Tell me something." "What thing, Dad?" (she

let the word expand with ironic deliberation). "Any old thing." "Okay, if I call you

that?" (eyes slit at the road). "Quite." "It's a sketch, you know. When did you fall for

my mummy?" "Some day, Lo, you will understand many emotions and situations,

such as for example the harmony, the beauty of spiritual relationship." "Bah!" said

the cynical nymphet. Shallow lull in the dialogue, filled with some landscape. "Look,

Lo, at all those cows on that hillside." "I think I'll vomit if I look at a cow again." "You

know, I missed you terribly, Lo." "I did not. Fact I've been revoltingly unfaithful to

you, but it does not matter one bit, because you've stopped caring for me, anyway.

You drive much faster than my mummy, mister." I slowed down from a blind seventy

to a purblind fifty. "Why do you think I have ceased caring for you, Lo?" "Well, you

haven't kissed me yet, have you?" Inly dying, inly moaning, I glimpsed a reasonably

wide shoulder of road ahead, and bumped and wobbled into the weeds. Remember

she is only a child, remember she is only-- Hardly had the car come to a standstill

than Lolita positively flowed into my arms. Not daring, not daring let myself go--not

even daring let myself realize that this (sweet wetness and trembling fire) was the

beginning of the ineffable life which, ably assisted by fate, I had finally willed into

being--not daring really kiss her, I touched her hot, opening lips with the utmost

piety, tiny sips, nothing salacious; but she, with an impatient wriggle, pressed her

mouth to mine so hard that I felt her big front teeth and shared in the peppermint

taste of her saliva. I knew, of course, it was but an innocent game on her part, a bit

of backfisch foolery in imitation of some simulacrum of fake romance, and since (as

the psychotherapist, as well as the rapist, will tell you) the limits and rules of such

girlish games are fluid, or at least too childishly subtle for the senior partner to

grasp--I was dreadfully afraid I might go too far and cause her to start back in

revulsion and terror. And, as above all I was agonizingly anxious to smuggle her into

the hermetic seclusion of The Enchanted Hunters, and we had still eighty miles to go,

blessed intuition broke our embrace--a split second before a highway patrol car drew

up alongside. Florid and beetle-browed, its driver stared at me: "Happen to see a

blue sedan, same make as yours, pass you before the junction?" "Why, no." "We

didn't," said Lo, eagerly leaning across me, her innocent hand on my legs, "but are

you sure it was blue, because--" The cop (what shadow of us was he after?) gave the

little colleen his best smile and went into a U-turn. We drove on. "The fruithead!"

remarked Lo. "He should have nabbed you." "Why me for heaven's sake?" "Well, the

speed in this bum state is fifty, and--No, don't slow down, you, dull bulb. He's gone

now." "We have still quite a stretch," I said, "and I want to get there before dark. So

be a good girl." "Bad, bad girl," said Lo comfortably. "Juvenile delickwent, but frank

and fetching. That light was red. I've never seen such driving." We rolled silently

through a silent townlet. "Say, wouldn't Mother be absolutely mad if she found out

we were lovers?" "Good Lord, Lo, let us not talk that way." "But we are lovers, aren't

we?" "Not that I know of. I think we are going to have some more rain. Don't you

want to tell me of those little pranks of yours in camp?" "You talk like a book, Dad."

"What have you been up to? I insist you tell me." "Are you easily shocked?" "No. Go

on." "Let us turn into a secluded lane and I'll tell you." "Lo, I must seriously ask you

not to play the fool. Well?" "Well--I joined in all the activities that were offered."

"Ensuite?" "Ansooit, I was taught to live happily and richly with others and to

develop a wholesome personality. Be a cake, in fact." "Yes. I saw something of the

sort in the booklet." "We loved the sings around the fire in the big stone fireplace or

under the darned stars, where every girl merged her own spirit of happiness with the

voice of the group." "Your memory is excellent, Lo, but I must trouble you to leave

out the swear words. Anything else?" "The Girl Scout's motto," said Lo rhapsodically,

"is also mine. I fill my life with worthwhile deeds such as--well, never mind what. My

duty is--to be useful. I am a friend to male animals. I obey orders. I am cheerful.

That was another police car. I am thrifty and I am absolutely filthy in thought, word

and deed." "Now I do hope that's all, you witty child." "Yep. That's all. No--wait a

sec. We baked in a reflector oven. Isn't that terrific?" "Well, that's better." "We

washed zillions of dishes. 'Zillions' you know is schoolmarm's slang for many-many-

many-many. Oh yes, last but not least, as Mother says--Now let me see--what was

it? I know we made shadowgraphs. Gee, what fun." "C'est bien tout?" "C'est. Except

for one little thing, something I simply can't tell you without blushing all over." "Will

you tell it me later?" "If we sit in the dark and you let me whisper, I will. Do you

sleep in your old room or in a heap with Mother?" "Old room. Your mother may have

to undergo a very serious operation, Lo." "Stop at that candy bar, will you," said Lo.

Sitting on a high stool, a band of sunlight crossing her bare brown forearm, Lolita

was served an elaborate ice-cream concoction topped with synthetic syrup. It was

erected and brought her by a pimply brute of a boy in a greasy bow-tie who eyed my

fragile child in her thin cotton frock with carnal deliberation. My impatience to reach

Briceland and The Enchanted Hunters was becoming more than I could endure.

Fortunately she dispatched the stuff with her usual alacrity. "How much cash do you

have?" I asked. "Not a cent," she said sadly, lifting her eyebrows, showing me the

empty inside of her money purse. "This is a matter that will be mended in due time,"

I rejoined archly. "Are you coming?" "Say, I wonder if they have a washroom." "you

are not going there," I said Firmly. "It is sure to be a vile place. Do come on." She

was on the whole an obedient little girl and I kissed her in the neck when we got

back into the car. "Don't do that," she said looking at me with unfeigned surprise.

"Don't drool on me. You dirty man." She rubbed the spot against her raised shoulder.

"Sorry," I murmured. "I'm rather fond of you, that's all." We drove under a gloomy

sky, up a winding road, then down again. "Well, I'm also sort of fond of you," said

Lolita in a delayed soft voice, with a sort of sigh, and sort of settled closer to me.

(Oh, my Lolita, we shall never get there!) Dusk was beginning to saturate pretty

little Briceland, its phony colonial architecture, curiosity sops and imported shade

trees, when we drove through the weakly lighted streets in search of the Enchanted

Hunters. The air, despite a steady drizzle beading it, was warm and green, and a

queue of people, mainly children and old men, had already formed before the box

office of a movie house, dripping with jewel-fires. "Oh, I want to see that picture.

Let's go right after dinner. Oh, let's!" "We might," chanted Humbert--knowing

perfectly well, the sly tumescent devil, that by nine, when his show began, she would

be dead in his arms. "Easy!" cried Lo, lurching forward, as an accursed truck in front

of us, its backside carbuncles pulsating, stopped at a crossing. If we did not get to

the hotel soon, immediately, miraculously, in the very next block, I felt I would lose

all control over the Haze jalopy with its ineffectual wipers and whimsical brakes; but

the passers-by I applied to for directions were either strangers themselves or asked

with a frown "Enchanted what?" as if I were a madman; or else they went into such

complicated explanations, with geometrical gestures, geographical generalities and

strictly local clues (. . . then bear south after you hit the court-house. . .) that I could

not help losing my way in the maze of their well-meaning gibberish. Lo, whose lovely

prismatic entrails had already digested the sweetmeat, was looking forward to a big

meal and had begun to fidget. As to me, although I had long become used to a kind

of secondary fate (McFate's inept secretary, so to speak) pettily interfering with the

boss's generous magnificent plan--to grind and grope through the avenues of

Briceland was perhaps the most exasperating ordeal I had yet faced. In later months

I could laugh at my inexperience when recalling the obstinate boyish way in which I

had concentrated upon that particular inn with its fancy name; for all along our route

countless motor courts proclaimed their vacancy in neon lights, ready to

accommodate salesmen, escaped convicts, impotents, family groups, as well as the

most corrupt and vigorous couples. Ah, gentle drivers gliding through summer's

black nights, what frolics, what twists of lust, you might see from your impeccable

highways if Kumfy Kabins were suddenly drained of their pigments and became as

transparent as boxes of glass! The miracle I hankered for did happen after all. A man

and a girl, more or less conjoined in a dark car under dripping trees, told us we were

in the heart of The Park, but had only to turn left at the next traffic light and there

we would be. We did not see any next traffic light--in fact, The Park was as black as

the sins it concealed--but soon after falling under the smooth spell of a nicely graded

curve, the travelers became aware of a diamond glow through the mist, then a

gleam of lakewater appeared--and there it was, marvelously and inexorably, under

spectral trees, at the top of a graveled drive--the pale palace of The Enchanted

Hunters. A row of parked cars, like pigs at a trough, seemed at first sight to forbid

access; but then, by magic, a formidable convertible, resplendent, rubious in the

lighted rain, came into motion--was energetically backed out by a broad-shouldered

driver--and we gratefully slipped into the gap it had left. I immediately regretted my

haste for I noticed that my predecessor had now taken advantage of a garage-like

shelter nearby where there was ample space for another car; but I was too impatient

to follow his example. "Wow! Looks swank," remarked my vulgar darling squinting at

the stucco as she crept out into the audible drizzle and with a childish hand tweaked

loose the frock-fold that had struck in the peach-cleft--to quote Robert Browning.

Under the arclights enlarged replicas of chestnut leaves plunged and played on white

pillars. I unlocked the trunk compartment. A hunchbacked and hoary Negro in a

uniform of sorts took our bags and wheeled them slowly into the lobby. It was full of

old ladies and clergy men. Lolita sank down on her haunches to caress a pale-faced,

blue-freckled, black-eared cocker spaniel swooning on the floral carpet under her

hand--as who would not, my heart--while I cleared my throat through the throng to

the desk. There a bald porcine old man--everybody was old in that old hotel--

examined my features with a polite smile, then leisurely produced my (garbled)

telegram, wrestled with some dark doubts, turned his head to look at the clock, and

finally said he was very sorry, he had held the room with the twin beds till half past

six, and now it was gone. A religious convention, he said, had clashed with a flower

show in Briceland, and--"The name," I said coldly, "is not Humberg and not Humbug,

but Herbert, I mean Humbert, and any room will do, just put in a cot for my little

daughter. She is ten and very tired." The pink old fellow peered good-naturedly at

Lo--still squatting, listening in profile, lips parted, to what the dog's mistress, an

ancient lady swathed in violet veils, was telling her from the depths of a cretonne

easy chair. Whatever doubts the obscene fellow had, they were dispelled by that

blossom-like vision. He said, he might still have a room, had one, in fact--with a

double bed. As to the cot-- "Mr. Potts, do we have any cots left?" Potts, also pink and

bald, with white hairs growing out of his ears and other holes, would see what could

be done. He came and spoke while I unscrewed my fountain pen. Impatient

Humbert! "Our double beds are really triple," Potts cozily said tucking me and my kid

in. "One crowded night we had three ladies and a child like yours sleep together. I

believe one of the ladies was a disguised man [my static]. However--would there be

a spare cot in 49, Mr. Swine? "I think it went to the Swoons," said Swine, the initial

old clown. "We'll manage somehow," I said. "My wife may join us later--but even

then, I suppose, we'll manage." The two pink pigs were now among my best friends.

In the slow clear hand of crime I wrote: Dr. Edgar H. Humbert and daughter, 342

Lawn Street, Ramsdale. A key (342!) was half-shown to me (magician showing

object he is about to palm)--and handed over to Uncle tom. Lo, leaving the dog as

she would leave me some day, rose from her haunches; a raindrop fell on Charlotte's

grave; a handsome young Negress slipped open the elevator door, and the doomed

child went in followed by her throat-clearing father and crayfish Tom with the bags.

Parody of a hotel corridor. Parody of silence and death. "Say, it's our house number,"

said cheerful Lo. There was a double bed, a mirror, a double bed in the mirror, a

closet door with mirror, a bathroom door ditto, a blue-dark window, a reflected bed

there, the same in the closet mirror, two chairs, a glass-topped table, two bedtables,

a double bed: a big panel bed, to be exact, with a Tuscan rose chenille spread, and

two frilled, pink-shaded nightlamps, left and right. I was tempted to place a five-

dollar bill in that sepia palm, but thought the largesse might be misconstrued, so I

placed a quarter. Added another. He withdrew. Click. Enfin seuls. "Are we going to

sleep in one room?" said Lo, her features working in that dynamic way they did--not

cross or disgusted (though plain on the brink of it) but just dynamic--when she

wanted to load a question with violent significance. "I've asked them to put in a cot.

Which I'll use if you like." "You are crazy," said Lo. "Why, my darling?" "Because, my

dahrling, when dahrling Mother finds out she'll divorce you and strangle me." Just

dynamic. Not really taking the matter too seriously. "Now look here," I said, sitting

down, while she stood, a few feet away from me, and stared at herself contentedly,

not unpleasantly surprised at her own appearance, filling with her own rosy sunshine

the surprised and pleased closet-door mirror. "Look here, Lo. Let's settle this once

for all. For all practical purposes I am your father. I have a feeling of great

tenderness for you. In your mother's absence I am responsible for your welfare. We

are not rich, and while we travel, we shall be obliged--we shall be thrown a good

deal together. Two people sharing one room, inevitably enter into a kind--how shall I

say--a kind--" "The word is incest," said Lo--and walked into the closet, walked out

again with a young golden giggle, opened the adjoining door, and after carefully

peering inside with her strange smoky eyes lest she make another mistake, retired

to the bathroom. I opened the window, tore off my sweat-drenched shirt, changed,

checked the pill vial in my coat pocket, unlocked the-- She drifted out. I tried to

embrace her: casually, a bit of controlled tenderness before dinner. She said: "Look,

let's cut out the kissing game and get something to eat." It was then that I sprang

my surprise. Oh, what a dreamy pet! She walked up to the open suitcase as if

stalking it from afar, at a kind of slow-motion walk, peering at that distant treasure

box on the luggage support. (Was there something wrong, I wondered, with those

great gray eyes of hers, or were we both plunged in the same enchanted mist?) She

stepped up to it, lifting her rather high-heeled feet rather high, and bending her

beautiful boy-knees while she walked through dilating space with the lentor of one

walking under water or in a flight dream. Then she raised by the armlets a copper-

colored, charming and quite expensive vest, very slowly stretching it between her

silent hands as if she were a bemused bird-hunter holding his breath over the

incredible bird he spreads out by the tips of its flaming wings. Then (while I stood

waiting for her) she pulled out the slow snake of a brilliant belt and tried it on. Then

she crept into my waiting arms, radiant, relaxed, caressing me with her tender,

mysterious, impure, indifferent, twilight eyes--for all the world, like the cheapest of

cheap cuties. For that is what nymphets imitate--while we moan and die. "What's the

katter with misses?" I muttered (word-control gone) into her hair. "If you must

know," she said, "you do it the wrong way." "Show, wight ray." "All in good time,"

responded the spoonerette. Seva ascendes, pulsata, brulans, kizelans,

dementissima. Elevator clatterans, pausa, clatterans, populus in corridoro. Hanc nisi

mors mihi adimet nemo! Juncea puellula, jo pensavo fondissime, nobserva nihil

quidquam; but, of course, in another moment I might have committed some dreadful

blunder; fortunately, she returned to the treasure box. From the bathroom, where it

took me quite a time to shift back into normal gear for a humdrum purpose, I heard,

standing, drumming, retaining my breath, my Lolita's "oo's" and "gee's" of girlish

delight. She had used the soap only because it was sample soap. "Well, come on, my

dear, if you are as hungry as I am." And so to the elevator, daughter swinging her

old white purse, father walking in front (nota bene: never behind, she is not a lady).

As we stood (now side by side) waiting to be taken down, she threw back her head,

yawned without restraint and shook her curls. "When did they make you get up at

that camp?" "Half-past--" she stifled another yawn--"six"--yawn in full with a shiver

of all her frame. "Half-past," she repeated, her throat filling up again. The dining

room met us with a smell of fried fat and a faded smile. It was a spacious and

pretentious place with maudlin murals depicting enchanted hunters in various

postures and states of enchantment amid a medley of pallid animals, dryads and

trees. A few scattered old ladies, two clergymen, and a man in a sports coat were

finishing their meals in silence. The dining room closed at nine, and the green-clad,

poker-faced serving girls were, happily, in a desperate hurry to get rid of us. "Does

not he look exactly, but exactly, like Quilty?" said Lo in a soft voice, her sharp brown

elbow not pointing, but visibly burning to point, at the lone diner in the loud checks,

in the far corner of the room. "Like our fat Ramsdale dentist?" Lo arrested the

mouthful of water she had just taken, and put down her dancing glass. "Course not,"

she said with a splutter of mirth. "I meant the writer fellow in the Dromes ad." Oh,

Fame! Oh, Femina! When the dessert was plunked down--a huge wedge of cherry pie

for the young lady and vanilla ice cream her protector, most of which she

expeditiously added to her pie--I produced a small vial containing Papa's Purple Pills.

As I look back at those seasick murals, at that strange and monstrous moment, I can

only explain my behavior then by the mechanism of that dream vacuum wherein

revolves a deranged mind; but at the time, it all seemed quite simple and inevitable

to me. I glanced around, satisfied myself that the last diner had left, removed the

stopped, and with the utmost deliberation tipped the philter into my palm. I had

carefully rehearsed before a mirror the gesture of clapping my empty hand to my

open mouth and swallowing a (fictitious) pill. As I expected, she pounced upon the

vial with its plump, beautifully colored capsules loaded with Beauty's Sleep. "Blue!"

she exclaimed. "Violet blue. What are they made of?" "Summer skies," I said, "and

plums and figs, and the grapeblood of emperors." "No, seriously--please." "Oh, just

purpills. Vitamin X. Makes one strong as an ox or an ax. Want to try one?" Lolita

stretched out her hand, nodding vigorously. I had hoped the drug would work fast. It

certainly did. She had had a long long day, she had gone rowing in the morning with

Barbara whose sister was Waterfront Director, as the adorable accessible nymphet

now started to tell me in between suppressed palate-humping yawns, growing in

volume--oh, how fast the magic potion worked!--and had been active in other ways

too. The movie that had vaguely loomed in her mind was, of course, by the time we

watertreaded out of the dining room, forgotten. As we stood in the elevator, she

leaned against me, faintly smiling--wouldn't you like me to tell you--half closing her

dark-lidded eyes. "Sleepy, huh?" said Uncle Tom who was bringing up the quiet

Franco-Irish gentleman and his daughter as well as two withered women, experts in

roses. They looked with sympathy at my frail, tanned, tottering, dazed rosedarling. I

had almost to carry her into our room. There, she sat down on the edge of the bed,

swaying a little, speaking in dove-dull, long-drawn tones. "If I tell you--if I tell you,

will you promise [sleepy, so sleepy--head lolling, eyes going out], promise you won't

make complaints?" "Later, Lo. Now go to bed. I'll leave you here, and you go to bed.

Give you ten minutes." "Oh, I've been such a disgusting girl," she went on, shaking

her hair, removing with slow fingers a velvet hair ribbon. "Lemme tell you--"

"Tomorrow, Lo. Go to bed, go to bed--for goodness sake, to bed." I pocketed the key

and walked downstairs.



28

Gentlewomen of the jury! Bear with me! Allow me to take just a tiny bit of your

precious time. So this was le grand moment. I had left my Lolita still sitting on the

edge of the abysmal bed, drowsily raising her foot, fumbling at the shoelaces and

showing as she did so the nether side of her thigh up to the crotch of her panties--

she had always been singularly absentminded, or shameless, or both, in matters of

legshow. This, then, was the hermetic vision of her which I had locked in--after

satisfying myself that the door carried no inside bolt. The key, with its numbered

dangler of carved wood, became forthwith the weighty sesame to a rapturous and

formidable future. It was mine, it was part of my hot hairy fist. In a few minutes--

say, twenty, say half-an-hour, sicher ist sicher as my uncle Gustave used to say--I

would let myself into that "342" and find my nymphet, my beauty and bride,

imprisoned in her crystal sleep. Jurors! If my happiness could have talked, it would

have filled that genteel hotel with a deafening roar. And my only regret today is that

I did not quietly deposit key "342" at the office, and leave the town, the country, the

continent, the hemisphere,--indeed, the globe--that very same night. Let me

explain. I was not unduly disturbed by her self-accusatory innuendoes. I was still

firmly resolved to pursue my policy of sparing her purity by operating only in the

stealth of night, only upon a completely anesthetized little nude. Restraint and

reverence were still my motto-even if that "purity" (incidentally, thoroughly

debunked by modern science) had been slightly damaged through some juvenile

erotic experience, no doubt homosexual, at that accursed camp of hers. Of course, in

my old-fashioned, old-world way, I, Jean-Jacques Humbert, had taken for granted,

when I first met her, that she was as unravished as the stereotypical notion of

"normal child" had been since the lamented end of the Ancient World B.C. and its

fascinating practices. We are not surrounded in our enlightened era by little slave

flowers that can be casually plucked between business and bath as they used to be

in the days of the Romans; and we do not, as dignified Orientals did in still more

luxurious times, use tiny entertainers fore and aft between the mutton and the rose

sherbet. The whole point is that the old link between the adult world and the child

world has been completely severed nowadays by new customs and new laws.

Despite my having dabbled in psychiatry and social work, I really knew very little

about children. After all, Lolita was only twelve, and no matter what concessions I

made to time and place--even bearing in mind the crude behavior of American

schoolchildren--I still was under the impression that whatever went on among those

brash brats, went on at a later age, and in a different environment. Therefore (to

retrieve the thread of this explanation) the moralist in me by-passed the issue by

clinging to conventional notions of what twelve-year-old girls should be. The child

therapist in me (a fake, as most of them are--but no matter) regurgitated neo-

Freudian hash and conjured up a dreaming and exaggerating Dolly in the "latency"

period of girlhood. Finally, the sensualist in me (a great and insane monster) had no

objection to some depravity in his prey. But somewhere behind the raging bliss,

bewildered shadows conferred--and not to have heeded them, this is what I regret!

Human beings, attend! I should have understood that Lolita had already proved to

be something quite different from innocent Annabel, and that the nymphean evil

breathing through every pore of the fey child that I had prepared for my secret

delectation, would make the secrecy impossible, and the delectation lethal. I should

have known (by the signs made to me by something in Lolita--the real child Lolita or

some haggard angel behind her back) that nothing but pain and horror would result

from the expected rapture. Oh, winged gentlemen of the jury! And she was mine,

she was mine, the key was in my fist, my fist was in my pocket, she was mine. In

the course of evocations and schemes to which I had dedicated so many insomnias, I

had gradually eliminated all the superfluous blur, and by stacking level upon level of

translucent vision, had evolved a final picture. Naked, except for one sock and her

charm bracelet, spread-eagled on the bed where my philter had felled her--so I

foreglimpsed her; a velvet hair ribbon was still clutched in her hand; her honey-

brown body, with the white negative image of a rudimentary swimsuit patterned

against her tan, presented to me its pale breastbuds; in the rosy lamplight, a little

pubic floss glistened on its plump hillock. The cold key with its warm wooden

addendum was in my pocket. I wandered through various public rooms, glory below,

gloom above: for the look of lust always is gloomy; lust is never quite sure--even

when the velvety victim is locked up in one's dungeon--that some rival devil or

influential god may still not abolish one's prepared triumph. In common parlance, I

needed a drink; but there was no barroom in that venerable place full of perspiring

philistines and period objects. I drifted to the Men's Room. There, a person in the

clerical black--a "hearty party" comme on dit--checking with the assistance of

Vienna, if it was still there, inquired of me how I had liked Dr. Boyd's talk, and

looked puzzled when I (King Sigmund the Second) said Boyd was quite a boy. Upon

which, I neatly chucked the tissue paper I had been wiping my sensitive finger tips

with into the receptacle provided for it, and sallied lobbyward. Comfortably resting

my elbows on the counter, I asked Mr. Potts was he quite sure my wife had not

telephoned, and what about that cot? He answered she had not (she was dead, of

course) and the cot would be installed tomorrow if we decided to stay on. From a big

crowded place called The Hunters' Hall came a sound of many voices discussing

horticulture or eternity. Another room, called The Raspberry Room, all bathed in

light, with bright little tables and a large one with "refreshments," was still empty

except for a hostess (that type of worn woman with a glassy smile and Charlotte's

manner of speaking); she floated up to me to ask if I was Mr. Braddock, because if

so, Miss Beard had been looking for me. "What a name for a woman," I said and

strolled away. In and out of my heart flowed my rainbow blood. I would give her till

half-past-nine. Going back to the lobby, I found there a change: a number of people

in floral dresses or black cloth had formed little groups here and there, and some

elfish chance offered me the sight of a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type

of frock, but pure white, and there was a white ribbon in her black hair. She was not

pretty, but she was a nymphet, and her ivory pale legs and lily neck formed for one

memorable moment a most pleasurable antiphony (in terms of spinal music) to my

desire for Lolita, brown and pink, flushed and fouled. The pale child noticed my gaze

(which was really quite casual and debonair), and being ridiculously self-conscious,

lost countenance completely, rolling her eyes and putting the back of her hand to her

cheek, and pulling at the hem of her skirt, and finally turning her thin mobile

shoulder blades to me in specious chat with her cow-like mother. I left the loud lobby

and stood outside, on the white steps, looking at the hundreds of powdered bugs

wheeling around the lamps in the soggy black night, full of ripple and stir. All I would

do--all I would dare do--would amount to such a trifle . . . Suddenly I was aware

that in the darkness next to me there was somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared

porch. I could not really see him but what gave him away was the rasp of a screwing

off, then a discreet gurgle, then the final note of a placid screwing on. I was about to

move away when his voice addressed me: "Where the devil did you get her?" "I beg

your pardon?" "I said: the weather is getting better." "Seems so." "Who's the

lassie?" "My daughter." "You lie--she's not." "I beg your pardon?" "I said: July was

hot. Where's her mother?" "Dead." "I see. Sorry. By the way, why don't you two

lunch with me tomorrow. That dreadful crowd will be gone by then." "We'll be gone

too. Good night." "Sorry. I'm pretty drunk. Good night. That child of yours needs a

lot of sleep. Sleep is a rose, as the Persians say. Smoke?" "Not now." He struck a

light, but because he was drunk, or because the wind was, the flame illumined not

him but another person, a very old man, one of those permanent guests of old

hotels--and his white rocker. Nobody said anything and the darkness returned to its

initial place. Then I heard the old-timer cough and deliver himself of some sepulchral

mucus. I left the porch. At least half an hour in all had elapsed. I ought to have

asked for a sip. The strain was beginning to tell. If a violin string can ache, then I

was that string. But it would have been unseemly to display any hurry. As I made

my way through a constellation of fixed people in one corner of the lobby, there

came a blinding flash--and beaming Dr. Braddock, two orchid-ornamentalized

matrons, the small girl in white, and presumably the bared teeth of Humbert

Humbert sidling between the bridelike lassie and the enchanted cleric, were

immortalized--insofar as the texture and print of small-town newspapers can be

deemed immortal. A twittering group had gathered near the elevator. I again chose

the stairs. 342 was near the fire escape. One could still--but the key was already in

the lock, and then I was in the room.



29

The door of the lighted bathroom stood ajar; in addition to that, a skeleton glow

came though the Venetian blind from the outside arclights; these intercrossed rays

penetrated the darkness of the bedroom and revealed the following situation.

Clothed in one of her old nightgowns, my Lolita lay on her side with her back to me,

in the middle of the bed. Her lightly veiled body and bare limbs formed a Z. She had

put both pillows under her dark tousled head; a band of pale light crossed her top

vertebrae. I seemed to have shed my clothes and slipped into pajamas with the kind

of fantastic instantaneousness which is implied when in a cinematographic scene the

process of changing is cut; and I had already placed my knee on the edge of the bed

when Lolita turned her head and stared at me though the striped shadows. Now this

was something the intruder had not expected. The whole pill-spiel (a rather sordid

affair, entre nous soit dit) had had for object a fastness of sleep that a whole

regiment would not have disturbed, and here she was staring at me, and thickly

calling me "Barbara." Barbara, wearing my pajamas which were much too tight for

her, remained poised motionless over the little sleep-talker. Softly, with a hopeless

sigh, Dolly turned away, resuming her initial position. For at least two minutes I

waited and strained on the brink, like that tailor with his homemade parachute forty

years ago when about to jump from the Eiffel Tower. Her faint breathing had the

rhythm of sleep. Finally I heaved myself onto my narrow margin of bed, stealthily

pulled at the odds and ends of sheets piled up to the south of my stone-cold heels--

and Lolita lifted her head and gaped at me. As I learned later from a helpful

pharmaceutist, the purple pill did not even belong to the big and noble family of

barbiturates, and though it might have induced sleep in a neurotic who believed it to

be a potent drug, it was too mild a sedative to affect for any length of time a wary,

albeit weary, nymphet. Whether the Ramsdale doctor was a charlatan or a shrewd

old rogue, does not, and did not, really matter. What mattered, was that I had been

deceived. When Lolita opened her eyes again, I realized that whether or not the drug

might work later in the night, the security I had relied upon was a sham one. Slowly

her head turned away and dropped onto her unfair amount of pillow. I lay quite still

on my brink, peering at her rumpled hair, at the glimmer of nymphet flesh, where

half a haunch and half a shoulder dimly showed, and trying to gauge the depth of

her sleep by the rate of her respiration. Some time passed, nothing changed, and I

decided I might risk getting a little closer to that lovely and maddening glimmer; but

hardly had I moved into its warm purlieus than her breathing was suspended, and I

had the odious feeling that little Dolores was wide awake and would explode in

screams if I touched her with any part of my wretchedness. Please, reader: no

matter your exasperation with the tenderhearted, morbidly sensitive, infinitely

circumspect hero of my book, do not skip these essential pages! Imagine me; I shall

not exist if you do not imagine me; try to discern the doe in me, trembling in the

forest of my own iniquity; let's even smile a little. After all, there is no harm in

smiling. For instance (I almost wrote "frinstance"), I had no place to rest my head,

and a fit of heartburn (they call those fries "French," grand Dieu!) was added to my

discomfort. She was again fast asleep, my nymphet, but still I did not dare to launch

upon my enchanted voyage. La Petite Dormeuse ou l'Amant Ridicule. Tomorrow I

would stuff her with those earlier pills that had so thoroughly numbed her mummy.

In the glove compartment--or in the Gladstone bag? Should I wait a solid hour and

then creep up again? The science of nympholepsy is a precise science. Actual contact

would do it in one second flat. An interspace of a millimeter would do it in ten. Let us

wait. There is nothing louder than an American hotel; and, mind you, this was

supposed to be a quiet, cozy, old-fashioned, homey place--"gracious living" and all

that stuff. The clatter of the elevator's gate--some twenty yards northeast of my

head but as clearly perceived as if it were inside my left temple--alternated with the

banging and booming of the machine's various evolutions and lasted well beyond

midnight. Every now and then, immediately east of my left ear (always assuming I

lay on my back, not daring to direct my viler side toward the nebulous haunch of my

bed-mate), the corridor would brim with cheerful, resonant and inept exclamations

ending in a volley of good-nights. When that stopped, a toilet immediately north of

my cerebellum took over. It was a manly, energetic, deep-throated toilet, and it was

used many times. Its gurgle and gush and long afterflow shook the wall behind me.

Then someone in a southern direction was extravagantly sick, almost coughing out

his life with his liquor, and his toilet descended like a veritable Niagara, immediately

beyond our bathroom. And when finally all the waterfalls had stopped, and the

enchanted hunters were sound asleep, the avenue under the window of my

insomnia, to the west of my wake--a staid, eminently residential, dignified alley of

huge trees--degenerated into the despicable haunt of gigantic trucks roaring through

the wet and windy night. And less than six inches from me and my burning life, was

nebulous Lolita! After a long stirless vigil, my tentacles moved towards her again,

and this time the creak of the mattress did not awake her. I managed to bring my

ravenous bulk so close to her that I felt the aura of her bare shoulder like a warm

breath upon my cheek. And then, she sat up, gasped, muttered with insane rapidity

something about boats, tugged at the sheets and lapsed back into her rich, dark,

young unconsciousness. As she tossed, within that abundant flow of sleep, recently

auburn, at present lunar, her arm struck me across the face. For a second I held her.

She freed herself from the shadow of my embrace--doing this not consciously, not

violently, not with any personal distaste, but with the neutral plaintive murmur of a

child demanding its natural rest. And again the situation remained the same: Lolita

with her curved spine to Humbert, Humbert resting his head on his hand and burning

with desire and dyspepsia. The latter necessitated a trip to the bathroom for a draft

of water which is the best medicine I know in my case, except perhaps milk with

radishes; and when I re-entered the strange pale-striped fastness where Lolita's old

and new clothes reclined in various attitudes of enchantment on pieces of furniture

that seemed vaguely afloat, my impossible daughter sat up and in clear tones

demanded a drink, too. She took the resilient and cold paper cup in her shadowy

hand and gulped down its contents gratefully, her long eyelashes pointing cupward,

and then, with an infantile gesture that carried more charm than any carnal caress,

little Lolita wiped her lips against my shoulder. She fell back on her pillow (I had

subtracted mine while she drank) and was instantly asleep again. I had not dared

offer her a second helping of the drug, and had not abandoned hope that the first

might still consolidate her sleep. I started to move toward her, ready for any

disappointment, knowing I had better wait but incapable of waiting. My pillow

smelled of her hair. I moved toward my glimmering darling, stopping or retreating

every time I thought she stirred or was about to stir. A breeze from wonderland had

begun to affect my thoughts, and now they seemed couched in italics, as if the

surface reflecting them were wrinkled by the phantasm of that breeze. Time and

again my consciousness folded the wrong way, my shuffling body entered the sphere

of sleep, shuffled out again, and once or twice I caught myself drifting into a

melancholy snore. Mists of tenderness enfolded mountains of longing. Now and then

it seemed to me that the enchanted prey was about to meet halfway the enchanted

hunter, that her haunch was working its way toward me under the soft sand of a

remote and fabulous beach; and then her dimpled dimness would stir, and I would

know she was farther away from me than ever. If I dwell at some length on the

tremors and groupings of that distant night, it is because I insist upon proving that I

am not, and never was, and never could have been, a brutal scoundrel. The gentle

and dreamy regions though which I crept were the patrimonies of poets--not crime's

prowling ground. Had I reached my goal, my ecstasy would have been all softness, a

case of internal combustion of which she would hardly have felt the heat, even if she

were wide awake. But I still hoped she might gradually be engulfed in a

completeness of stupor that would allow me to taste more than a glimmer of her.

And so, in between tentative approximations, with a confusion of perception

metamorphosing her into eyespots of moonlight or a fluffy flowering bush, I would

dream I regained consciousness, dream I lay in wait. In the first antemeridian hours

there was a lull in the restless hotel night. Then around four the corridor toilet

cascaded and its door banged. A little after five a reverberating monologue began to

arrive, in several installments, from some courtyard or parking place. It was not

really a monologue, since the speaker stopped every few seconds to listen

(presumably) to another fellow, but that other voice did not reach me, and so no real

meaning could be derived from the part heard. Its matter-of-fact intonations,

however, helped to bring in the dawn, and the room was already suffused with lilac

gray, when several industrious toilets went to work, one after the other, and the

clattering and whining elevator began to rise and take down early risers and

downers, and for some minutes I miserably dozed, and Charlotte was a mermaid in a

greenish tank, and somewhere in the passage Dr. Boyd said "Good morning to you"

in a fruity voice, and birds were busy in the trees, and then Lolita yawned. Frigid

gentlewomen of the jury! I had thought that months, perhaps years, would elapse

before I dared to reveal myself to Dolores Haze; but by six she was wide awake, and

by six fifteen we were technically lovers. I am going to tell you something very

strange: it was she who seduced me. Upon hearing her first morning yawn, I feigned

handsome profiled sleep. I just did not know what to do. Would she be shocked at

finding me by her side, and not in some spare bed? Would she collect her clothes

and lock herself up in the bathroom? Would she demand to be taken at once to

Ramsdale--to her mother's bedside--back to camp? But my Lo was a sportive lassie.

I felt her eyes on me, and when she uttered at last that beloved chortling note of

hers, I knew her eyes had been laughing. She rolled over to my side, and her warm

brown hair came against my collarbone. I gave a mediocre imitation of waking up.

We lay quietly. I gently caressed her hair, and we gently kissed. Her kiss, to my

delirious embarrassment, had some rather comical refinements of flutter and probe

which made me conclude she had been coached at an early age by a little Lesbian.

No Charlie boy could have taught her that. As if to see whether I had my fill and

learned the lesson, she drew away and surveyed me. Her cheekbones were flushed,

her full underlip glistened, my dissolution was near. All at once, with a burst of rough

glee (the sign of the nymphet!), she put her mouth to my ear--but for quite a while

my mind could not separate into words the hot thunder of her whisper, and she

laughed, and brushed the hair off her face, and tried again, and gradually the odd

sense of living in a brand new, mad new dream world, where everything was

permissible, came over me as I realized what she was suggesting. I answered I did

not know what game she and Charlie had played. "You mean you have never--?"--

her features twisted into a stare of disgusted incredulity. "You have never--" she

started again. I took time out by nuzzling her a little. "Lay off, will you," she said

with a twangy whine, hastily removing her brown shoulder from my lips. (It was very

curious the way she considered--and kept doing so for a long time--all caresses

except kisses on the mouth or the stark act of love either "romantic slosh" or

"abnormal".) "You mean," she persisted, now kneeling above me, "you never did it

when you were a kid?" "Never," I answered quite truthfully. "Okay," said Lolita,

"here is where we start." However, I shall not bore my learned readers with a

detailed account of Lolita's presumption. Suffice it to say that not a trace of modesty

did I perceive in this beautiful hardly formed young girl whom modern co-education,

juvenile mores, the campfire racket and so forth had utterly and hopelessly

depraved. She saw the stark act merely as part of a youngster's furtive world,

unknown to adults. What adults did for purposes of procreation was no business of

hers. My life was handled by little Lo in an energetic, matter-of-fact manner as if it

were an insensate gadget unconnected with me. While eager to impress me with the

world of tough kids, she was not quite prepared for certain discrepancies between a

kid's life and mine. Pride alone prevented her from giving up; for, in my strange

predicament, I feigned supreme stupidity and had her have her way--at least while I

could still bear it. But really these are irrelevant matters; I am not concerned with

so-called "sex" at all. Anybody can imagine those elements of animality. A greater

endeavor lures me on: to fix once for all the perilous magic of nymphets.



30

I have to tread carefully. I have to speak in a whisper. Oh you, veteran crime

reporter, you grave old usher, you once popular policeman, now in solitary

confinement after gracing that school crossing for years, you wretched emeritus read

to by a boy! It would never do, would it, to have you fellows fall madly in love with

my Lolita! had I been a painter, had the management of The Enchanted Hunters lost

its mind one summer day and commissioned me to redecorate their dining room with

murals of my own making, this is what I might have thought up, let me list some

fragments: There would have been a lake. There would have been an arbor in flame-

flower. There would have been nature studies--a tiger pursuing a bird of paradise, a

choking snake sheathing whole the flayed trunk of a shoat. There would have been a

sultan, his face expressing great agony (belied, as it were, by his molding caress),

helping a callypygean slave child to climb a column of onyx. There would have been

those luminous globules of gonadal glow that travel up the opalescent sides of juke

boxes. There would have been all kinds of camp activities on the part of the

intermediate group, Canoeing, Coranting, Combing Curls in the lakeside sun. There

would have been poplars, apples, a suburban Sunday. There would have been a fire

opal dissolving within a ripple-ringed pool, a last throb, a last dab of color, stinging

red, smearing pink, a sigh, a wincing child.



31

I am trying to describe these things not to relive them in my present boundless

misery, but to sort out the portion of hell and the portion of heaven in that strange,

awful, maddening world--nymphet love. The beastly and beautiful merged at one

point, and it is that borderline I would like to fix, and I feel I fail to do so utterly.

Why? The stipulation of the Roman law, according to which a girl may marry at

twelve, was adopted by the Church, and is still preserved, rather tacitly, in some of

the United States. And fifteen is lawful everywhere. There is nothing wrong, say both

hemispheres, when a brute of forty, blessed by the local priest and bloated with

drink, sheds his sweat-drenched finery and thrusts himself up to the hilt into his

youthful bride. "In such stimulating temperate climates [says an old magazine in this

prison library] as St. Louis, Chicago and Cincinnati, girls mature about the end of

their twelfth year." Dolores Haze was born less than three hundred miles from

stimulating Cincinnati. I have but followed nature. I am nature's faithful hound. Why

then this horror that I cannot shake off? Did I deprive her of her flower? Sensitive

gentlewomen of the jury, I was not even her first lover.



32

She told me the way she had been debauched. We ate flavorless mealy bananas,

bruised peaches and very palatable potato chips, and die Kleine told me everything.

Her voluble but disjointed account was accompanied by many a droll moue. As I

think I have already observed, I especially remember one wry face on an "ugh!"

basis: jelly-mouth distended sideways and eyes rolled up in a routine blend of comic

disgust, resignation and tolerance for young frailty. Her astounding tale started with

an introductory mention of her tent-mate of the previous summer, at another camp,

a "very select" one as she put it. That tent-mate ("quite a derelict character," "half-

crazy," but a "swell kid") instructed her in various manipulations. At first, loyal Lo

refused to tell me her name. "Was it Grace Angel?" I asked. She shook her head. No,

it wasn't it was the daughter of a big shot. He-- "Was it perhaps Rose Carmine?"

"No, of course not. Her father--" "Was it, then, Agnes Sheridan perchance?" She

swallowed and shook her head--and then did a double take. "Say, how come you

know all those kids?" I explained. "Well," she said. "They are pretty bad, some of

that school bunch, but not that bad. If you have to know, her name was Elizabeth

Talbot, she goes now to a swanky private school, her father is an executive." I

recalled with a funny pang the frequency with which poor Charlotte used to introduce

into party chat such elegant tidbits as "when my daughter was out hiking last year

with the Talbot girl." I wanted to know if either mother learned of those sapphic

diversions? "Gosh no," exhaled limp Lo mimicking dread and relief, pressing a falsely

fluttering hand to her chest. I was more interested, however, in heterosexual

experience. She had entered the sixth grade at eleven, soon after moving to

Ramsdale from the Middle West. What did she mean by "pretty bad"? Well, the

Miranda twins had shared the same bed for years, and Donald Scott, who was the

dumbest boy in the school, had done it with Hazel Smith in his uncle's garage, and

Kenneth Knight--who was the brightest--used to exhibit himself wherever and

whenever he had a chance, and-- "Let us switch to Camp Q," I said. And presently I

got the whole story. Barbara Burke, a sturdy blond, two years older than Lo and by

far the camp's best swimmer, had a very special canoe which she shared with Lo

"because I was the only other girl who could make Willow Island" (some swimming

test, I imagine). Through July, every morning--mark, reader, every blessed morning-

-Barbara and Lo would be helped to carry the boat to Onyx or Eryx (two small lakes

in the wood) by Charlie Holmes, the camp mistress' son, aged thirteen--and the only

human male for a couple of miles around (excepting an old meek stone-deaf

handyman, and a farmer in an old Ford who sometimes sold the campers eggs as

farmers will); every morning, oh my reader, the three children would take a short

cut through the beautiful innocent forest brimming with all the emblems of youth,

dew, birdsongs, and at one point, among the luxuriant undergrowth, Lo would be left

as sentinel, while Barbara and the boy copulated behind a bush. At first, Lo had

refused "to try what it was like," but curiosity and camaraderie prevailed, and soon

she and Barbara were doing it by turns with the silent, coarse and surly but

indefatigable Charlie, who had as much sex appeal as a raw carrot but sported a

fascinating collection of contraceptives which he used to fish out of a third nearby

lake, a considerably larger and more populous one, called Lake Climax, after the

booming young factory town of that name. Although conceding it was "sort of fun"

and "fine for the complexion," Lolita, I am glad to say, held Charlie's mind and

manners in the greatest contempt. Nor had her temperament been roused by that

filthy fiend. In fact, I think he had rather stunned it, despite the "fun." By that time it

was close to ten. With the ebb of lust, an ashen sense of awfulness, abetted by the

realistic drabness of a gray neuralgic day, crept over me and hummed within my

temples. Brown, naked, frail Lo, her narrow white buttocks to me, her sulky face to a

door mirror, stood, arms akimbo, feet (in new slippers with pussy-fur tops) wide

apart, and through a forechanging lock tritely mugged at herself in the glass. From

the corridor came the cooing voices of colored maids at work, and presently there

was a mild attempt to open the door of our room. I had Lo go to the bathroom and

take a much-needed soap shower. The bed was a frightful mess with overtones of

potato chips. She tried on a two-piece navy wool, then a sleeveless blouse with a

swirly clathrate skirt, but the first was too tight and the second too ample, and when

I begged her to hurry up (the situation was beginning to frighten me), Lo viciously

sent those nice presents of mine hurtling into a corner, and put on yesterday's dress.

When she was ready at last, I gave her a lovely new purse of simulated calf (in

which I had slipped quite a few pennies and two mint-bright dimes) and told her to

buy herself a magazine in the lobby. "I'll be down in a minute," I said. "And if I were

you, my dear, I would not talk to strangers." Except for my poor little gifts, there

was not much to pack; but I was forced to devote a dangerous amount of time (was

she up to something downstairs?) to arranging the bed in such a way as to suggest

the abandoned nest of a restless father and his tomboy daughter, instead of an ex-

convict's saturnalia with a couple of fat old whores. Then I finished dressing and had

the hoary bellboy come up for the bags. Everything was fine. There, in the lobby, she

sat, deep in an overstuffed blood-red armchair, deep in a lurid movie magazine. A

fellow of my age in tweeds (the genre of the place had changed overnight to a

spurious country-squire atmosphere) was staring at my Lolita over his dead cigar

and stale newspaper. She wore her professional white socks and saddle oxfords, and

that bright print frock with the square throat; a splash of jaded lamplight brought out

the golden down on her warm brown limbs. There she sat, her legs carelessly

highcrossed, and her pale eyes skimming along the lines with every now and then a

blink. Bill's wife had worshipped him from afar long before they ever met: in fact,

she used to secretly admire the famous young actor as he ate sundaes in Schwab's

drugstore. Nothing could have been more childish than her snubbed nose, freckled

face or the purplish spot on her naked neck where a fairytale vampire had feasted,

or the unconscious movement of her tongue exploring a touch of rosy rash around

her swollen lips; nothing could be more harmless than to read about Jill, an energetic

starlet who made her own clothes and was a student of serious literature; nothing

could be more innocent than the part in that glossy brown hair with that silky sheen

on the temple; nothing could be more naive--But what sickening envy the lecherous

fellow whoever he was--come to think of it, he resembled a little my Swiss uncle

Gustave, also a great admirer of le dicouvert--would have experienced had he known

that every nerve in me was still anointed and ringed with the feel of her body--the

body of some immortal demon disguised as a female child. Was pink pig Mr. Swoon

absolutely sure my wife had not telephoned? He was. If she did, would he tell her we

had gone on to Aunt Clare's place? He would, indeedie. I settled the bill and roused

Lo from her chair. She read to the car. Still reading, she was driven to a so-called

coffee shop a few blocks south. Oh, she ate all right. She even laid aside her

magazine to eat, but a queer dullness had replaced her usual cheerfulness. I knew

little Lo could be very nasty, so I braced myself and grinned, and waited for a squall.

I was unbathed, unshaven, and had had no bowel movement. My nerves were a-

jangle. I did not like the way my little mistress shrugged her shoulders and

distended her nostrils when I attempted casual small talk. Had Phyllis been in the

know before she joined her parents in Maine? I asked with a smile. "Look," said Lo

making a weeping grimace, "let us get off the subject." I then tried--also

unsuccessfully, no matter how I smacked my lips--to interest her in the road map.

Our destination was, let me remind my patient reader whose meek temper Lo ought

to have copied, the gay town of Lepingville, somewhere near a hypothetical hospital.

That destination was in itself a perfectly arbitrary one (as, alas, so many were to be),

and I shook in my shoes as I wondered how to keep the whole arrangement

plausible, and what other plausible objectives to invent after we had taken in all the

movies in Lepingville. More and more uncomfortable did Humbert Feel. It was

something quite special, that feeling: an oppressive, hideous constraint as if I were

sitting with the small ghost of somebody I had just killed. As she was in the act of

getting back into the car, an expression of pain flitted across Lo's face. It flitted

again, more meaningfully, as she settled down beside me. No doubt, she reproduced

it that second time for my benefit. Foolishly, I asked her what was the matter.

"Nothing, you brute," she replied. "You what?" I asked. She was silent. Leaving

Briceland. Loquacious Lo was silent. Cold spiders of panic crawled down my back.

This was an orphan. This was a lone child, an absolute waif, with whom a heavy-

limbed, foul-smelling adult had had strenuous intercourse three times that very

morning. Whether or not the realization of a lifelong dream had surpassed all

expectation, it had, in a sense, overshot its mark--and plunged into a nightmare. I

had been careless, stupid, and ignoble. And let me be quite frank: somewhere at the

bottom of that dark turmoil I felt the writhing of desire again, so monstrous was my

appetite for that miserable nymphet. Mingled with the pangs of guilt was the

agonizing through that her mood might prevent me from making love to her again as

soon as I found a nice country road where to park in peace. In other words, poor

Humbert Humbert was dreadfully unhappy, and while steadily and inanely driving

toward Lepingville, he kept racking his brains for some quip, under the bright wing of

which he might dare turn to his seatmate. It was she, however, who broke the

silence: "Oh, a squashed squirrel," she said. "What a shame." "Yes, isn't it?" (eager,

hopeful Hum). "Let us stop at the next gas station," Lo continued. "I want to go to

the washroom." "We shall stop wherever you want," I said. And then as a lovely,

lonely, supercilious grove (oaks, I thought; American trees at that stage were

beyond me) started to echo greenly the rush of our car, a red and ferny road on our

right turned its head before slanting into the woodland, and I suggested we might

perhaps-- "Drive on," my Lo cried shrilly. "Righto. Take it easy." (Down, poor beast,

down.) I glanced at her. Thank God, the child was smiling. "You chump," she said,

sweetly smiling at me. "You revolting creature. I was a daisy-fresh girl, and look

what you've done to me. I ought to call the police and tell them you raped me. Oh,

you dirty, dirty old man." Was she just joking? An ominous hysterical note rang

through her silly words. Presently, making a sizzling sound with her lips, she started

complaining of pains, said she could not sit, said I had torn something inside her.

The sweat rolled down my neck, and we almost ran over some little animal or other

that was crossing the road with tail erect, and again my vile-tempered companion

called me an ugly name. When we stopped at the filling station, she scrambled out

without a word and was a long time away. Slowly, lovingly, an elderly friend with a

broken nose wiped my windshield--they do it differently at every place, from

chamois cloth to soapy brush, this fellow used a pink sponge. She appeared at last.

"Look," she said in that neutral voice that hurt me so, "give me some dimes and

nickels. I want to call mother in that hospital. What's the number?" "Get in," I said.

"You can't call that number." "Why?" "Get in and slam the door." She got in and

slammed the door. The old garage man beamed at her. I swung onto the highway.

"Why can't I call my mother if I want to?" "Because," I answered, "your mother is

dead."



33

In the gay town of Lepingville I bought her four books of comics, a box of candy, a

box of sanitary pads, two cokes, a manicure set, a travel clock with a luminous dial,

a ring with a real topaz, a tennis racket, roller skates with white high shoes, field

glasses, a portable radio set, chewing gum, a transparent raincoat, sunglasses, some

more garments--swooners, shorts, all kinds of summer frocks. At the hotel we had

separate rooms, but in the middle of the night she came sobbing into mine, and we

made it up very gently. You see, she had absolutely nowhere else to go.

* PART TWO *



1

It was then that began our extensive travels all over the States. To any other type of

tourist accommodation I soon grew to prefer the Functional Motel--clean, neat, safe

nooks, ideal places for sleep, argument, reconciliation, insatiable illicit love. At first,

in my dread of arousing suspicion, I would eagerly pay for both sections of one

double unit, each containing a double bed. I wondered what type of foursome this

arrangement was even intended for, since only a pharisaic parody of privacy could

be attained by means of the incomplete partition dividing the cabin or room into two

communicating love nests. By and by, the very possibilities that such honest

promiscuity suggested (two young couples merrily swapping mates or a child

shamming sleep to earwitness primal sonorities) made me bolder, and every now

and then I would take a bed-and-cot or twin-bed cabin, a prison cell or paradise,

with yellow window shades pulled down to create a morning illusion of Venice and

sunshine when actually it was Pennsylvania and rain. We came to know--nous

connshmes, to use a Flaubertian intonation--the stone cottages under enormous

Chateaubriandesque trees, the brick unit, the adobe unit, the stucco court, on what

the Tour Book of the Automobile Association describes as "shaded" or "spacious" or

"landscaped" grounds. The log kind, finished in knotty pine, reminded Lo, by its

golden-brown glaze, of friend-chicken bones. We held in contempt the plain

whitewashed clapboard Kabins, with their faint sewerish smell or some other gloomy

self-conscious stench and nothing to boast of (except "good beds"), and an unsmiling

landlady always prepared to have her gift (". . . well, I could give you . . .") turned

down. Nous connshmes (this is royal fun) the would-be enticements of their

repetitious names--all those Sunset Motels, U-Beam Cottages, Hillcrest Courts, Pine

View Courts, Mountain View Courts, Skyline Courts, Park Plaza Courts, Green Acres,

Mac's Courts. There was sometimes a special line in the write-up, such as "Children

welcome, pets allowed" (You are welcome, you are allowed). The baths were mostly

tiled showers, with an endless variety of spouting mechanisms, but with one

definitely non-Laodicean characteristic in common, a propensity, while in use, to turn

instantly beastly hot or blindingly cold upon you, depending on whether your

neighbor turned on his cold or his hot to deprive you of a necessary complement in

the shower you had so carefully blended. Some motels had instructions pasted above

the toilet (on whose tank the towels were unhygienically heaped) asking guests not

to throw into its bowl garbage, beer cans, cartons, stillborn babies; others had

special notices under glass, such as Things to Do (Riding: You will often see riders

coming down Main Street on their way back from a romantic moonlight ride. "Often

at 3 a.m.," sneered unromantic Lo). Nous connshmes the various types of motor

court operators, the reformed criminal, the retired teacher and the business flop,

among the males; and the motherly, pseudo-ladylike and madamic variants among

the females. And sometimes trains would cry in the monstrously hot and humid night

with heartrending and ominous plangency, mingling power and hysteria in one

desperate scream. We avoided Tourist Homes, country cousins of Funeral ones, old-

fashioned, genteel and showerless, with elaborate dressing tables in depressingly

white-and-pink little bedrooms, and photographs of the landlady's children in all their

instars. But I did surrender, now and then, to Lo's predilection for "real" hotels. She

would pick out in the book, while I petted her in the parked car in the silence of a

dusk-mellowed, mysterious side-road, some highly recommended lake lodge which

offered all sorts of things magnified by the flashlight she moved over them, such as

congenial company, between-meals snacks, outdoor barbecues--but which in my

mind conjured up odious visions of stinking high school boys in sweatshirts and an

ember-red cheek pressing against hers, while poor Dr. Humbert, embracing nothing

but two masculine knees, would cold-humor his piles on the damp turf. Most empty

to her, too, were those "Colonial" Inns, which apart from "gracious atmosphere" and

picture windows, promised "unlimited quantities of M-m-m food." Treasured

recollections of my father's palatial hotel sometimes led me to seek for its like in the

strange country we traveled through. I was soon discouraged; but Lo kept following

the scent of rich food ads, while I derived a not exclusively economic kick from such

roadside signs as Timber Hotel, Children under 14 Free. On the other hand, I

shudder when recalling that soi-disant "high-class" resort in a Midwestern state,

which advertised "raid-the-icebox" midnight snacks and, intrigued by my accent,

wanted to know my dead wife's and dead mother's maiden names. A two-days' stay

there cost me a hundred and twenty-four dollars! And do you remember, Miranda,

that other "ultrasmart" robbers' den with complimentary morning coffee and

circulating ice water, and no children under sixteen (no Lolitas, of course)?

Immediately upon arrival at one of the plainer motor courts which became our

habitual haunts, she would set the electric fan a-whirr, or induce me to drop a

quarter into the radio, or she would read all the signs and inquire with a whine why

she could not go riding up some advertised trail or swimming in that local pool of

warm mineral water. Most often, in the slouching, bored way she cultivated, Lo

would fall prostrate and abominably desirable into a red springchair or a green chaise

longue, or a steamer chair of striped canvas with footrest and canopy, or a sling

chair, or any other lawn chair under a garden umbrella on the patio, and it would

take hours of blandishments, threats and promises to make her lend me for a few

seconds her brown limbs in the seclusion of the five-dollar room before undertaking

anything she might prefer to my poor joy. A combination of naoveti and deception,

of charm and vulgarity, of blue silks and rosy mirth, Lolita, when she chose, could be

a most exasperating brat. I was not really quite prepared for her fits of disorganized

boredom, intense and vehement griping, her sprawling, droopy, dopey-eyed style,

and what is called goofing off--a kind of diffused clowning which she thought was

tough in a boyish hoodlum way. Mentally, I found her to be a disgustingly

conventional little girl. Sweet hot jazz, square dancing, gooey fudge sundaes,

musicals, movie magazines and so forth--these were the obvious items in her list of

beloved things. The Lord knows how many nickels I fed to the gorgeous music boxes

that came with every meal we had! I still hear the nasal voices of those invisibles

serenading her, people with names like Sammy and Jo and Eddy and Tony and

Peggy and Guy and Patty and Rex, and sentimental song hits, all of them as similar

to my ear as her various candies were to my palate. She believed, with a kind of

celestial trust, any advertisement or advice that that appeared in Movie Love or

Screen Land--Starasil Starves Pimples, or "You better watch out if you're wearing

your shirttails outside your jeans, gals, because Jill says you shouldn't." If a roadside

sign said: Visit Our Gift Shop--we had to visit it, had to buy its Indian curios, dolls,

copper jewelry, cactus candy. The words "novelties and souvenirs" simply entranced

her by their trochaic lilt. If some cafi sign proclaimed Icecold Drinks, she was

automatically stirred, although all drinks everywhere were ice-cold. She it was to

whom ads were dedicated: the ideal consumer, the subject and object of every foul

poster. And she attempted--unsuccessfully-to patronize only those restaurants where

the holy spirit of Huncan Dines had descended upon the cute paper napkins and

cottage-cheese-crested salads. In those days, neither she nor I had thought up yet

the system of monetary bribes which was to work such havoc with my nerves and

her morals somewhat later. I relied on three other methods to keep my pubescent

concubine in submission and passable temper. A few years before, she had spent a

rainy summer under Miss Phalen's bleary eye in a dilapidated Appalachian farmhouse

that had belonged to some gnarled Haze or other in the dead past. It still stood

among its rank acres of golden rod on the edge of a flowerless forest, at the end of a

permanently muddy road, twenty miles from the nearest hamlet. Lo recalled that

scarecrow of a house, the solitude, the soggy old pastures, the wind, the bloated

wilderness, with an energy of disgust that distorted her mouth and fattened her half-

revealed tongue. And it was there that I warned her she would dwell with me in exile

for months and years if need be, studying under me French and Latin, unless her

"present attitude" changed. Charlotte, I began to understand you! A simple child, Lo

would scream no! and frantically clutch at my driving hand whenever I put a stop to

her tornadoes of temper by turning in the middle of a highway with the implication

that I was about to take her straight to that dark and dismal abode. The farther,

however, we traveled away from it west, the less tangible that menace became, and

I had to adopt other methods of persuasion. Among these, the reformatory threat is

the one I recall with the deepest moan of shame. From the very beginning of our

concourse, I was clever enough to realize that I must secure her complete co-

operation in keeping our relations secret, that it should become a second nature with

her, no matter what grudge she might bear me, no matter what other pleasure she

might seek. "Come and kiss your old man," I would say, "and drop that moody

nonsense. In former times, when I was still your dream male [the reader will notice

what pains I took to speak Lo's tongue], you swooned to records of the number one

throb-and-sob idol of your coevals [Lo: "Of my what? Speak English"]. That idol of

your pals sounded, you thought, like friend Humbert. But now, I am just your old

man, a dream dad protecting his dream daughter. "My chhre Doloris ! I want to

protect you, dear, from all the horrors that happen to little girls in coal sheds and

alley ways, and alas, comme vous le savez trop bien, ma gentille, in the blueberry

woods during the bluest of summers. Through thick and thin I will still stay your

guardian, and if you are good, I hope a court may legalize that guardianship before

long. Let us, however, forget, Dolores Haze, so-called legal terminology, terminology

that accepts as rational the term 'lewd and lascivious cohabitation.' I am not a

criminal sexual psychopath taking indecent liberties with a child. The rapist was

Charlie Holmes; I am the therapist--a matter of nice spacing in the way of

distinction. I am your daddum, Lo. Look, I've a learned book here about young girls.

Look, darling, what it says. I quote: the normal girl--normal, mark you--the normal

girl is usually extremely anxious to please her father. She feels in him the forerunner

of the desired elusive male ('elusive' is good, by Polonius!). The wise mother (and

your poor mother would have been wise, had she lived) will encourage a

companionship between father and daughter, realizing--excuse the corny style--that

the girl forms her ideals of romance and of men from her association with her father.

Now, what association does this cheery book mean--and recommend? I quote again:

Among Sicilians sexual relations between a father and his daughter are accepted as a

matter of course, and the girl who participates in such relationship is not looked

upon with disapproval by the society of which she is part. I'm a great admirer of

Sicilians, fine athletes, fine musicians, fine upright people, Lo, and great lovers. But

let's not digress. Only the other day we read in the newspapers some bunkum about

a middle-aged morals offender who pleaded guilty to the violation of the Mann Act

and to transporting a nine-year-old girl across state lines for immoral purposes,

whatever these are. Dolores darling! You are not nine but almost thirteen, and I

would not advise you to consider yourself my cross-country slave, and I deplore the

Mann Act as lending itself to a dreadful pun, the revenge that the Gods of Semantics

take against tight-zippered Philistines. I am your father, and I am speaking English,

and I love you. "Finally, let us see what happens if you, a minor, accused of having

impaired the morals of an adult in a respectable inn, what happens if you complain

to the police of my having kidnapped and raped you? Let us suppose they believe

you. A minor female, who allows a person over twenty-one to know her carnally,

involves her victim into statutory rape, or second-degree sodomy, depending on the

technique; and the maximum penalty is ten years. So, I go to jail. Okay. I go to jail.

But what happens to you, my orphan? Well, you are luckier. You become the ward of

the Department of Public Welfare--which I am afraid sounds a little bleak. A nice

grim matron of the Miss Phalen type, but more rigid and not a drinking woman, will

take away your lipstick and fancy clothes. No more gadding about! I don't know if

you have ever heard of the laws relating to dependent, neglected, incorrigible and

delinquent children. While I stand gripping the bars, you, happy neglected child, will

be given a choice of various dwelling places, all more or less the same, the

correctional school, the reformatory, the juvenile detention home, or one of those

admirable girls' protectories where you knit things, and sing hymns, and have rancid

pancakes on Sundays. You will go there, Lolita--my Lolita, this Lolita will leave

plainer words, if we two are found out, you will be analyzed and institutionalized, my

pet, c'est tout. You will dwell, my Lolita will dwell (come here, my brown flower) with

thirty-nine other dopes in a dirty dormitory (no, allow me, please) under the

supervision of hideous matrons. This is the situation, this is the choice. Don't you

think that under the circumstances Dolores Haze had better stick to her old man?"

By rubbing all this in, I succeeded in terrorizing Lo, who despite a certain brash

alertness of manner and spurts of wit was not as intelligent a child as her I.Q. might

suggest. But if I managed to establish that background of shared secrecy and shared

guilt, I was much less successful in keeping her in good humor. Every morning

during our yearlong travels I had to devise some expectation, some special point in

space and time for her to look forward to, for her to survive till bedtime. Otherwise,

deprived of a shaping and sustaining purpose, the skeleton of her day sagged and

collapsed. The object in view might be anything--a lighthouse in Virginia, a natural

cave in Arkansas converted to a cafi, a collection of guns and violins somewhere in

Oklahoma, a replica of the Grotto of Lourdes in Louisiana, shabby photographs of the

bonanza mining period in the local museum of a Rocky Mountains resort, anything

whatsoever--but it had to be there, in front of us, like a fixed star, although as likely

as not Lo would feign gagging as soon as we got to it. By putting the geography of

the United States into motion, I did my best for hours on end to give her the

impression of "going places," of rolling on to some definite destination, to some

unusual delight. I have never seen such smooth amiable roads as those that now

radiated before us, across the crazy quilt of forty-eight states. Voraciously we

consumed those long highways, in rapt silence we glided over their glossy black

dance floors. Not only had Lo no eye for scenery but she furiously resented my

calling her attention to this or that enchanting detail of landscape; which I myself

learned to discern only after being exposed for quite a time to the delicate beauty

ever present in the margin of our undeserving journey. By a paradox of pictorial

thought, the average lowland North-American countryside had at first seemed to me

something I accepted with a shock of amused recognition because of those painted

oilclothes which were imported from America in the old days to be hung above

washstands in Central-European nurseries, and which fascinated a drowsy child at

bed time with the rustic green views they depicted--opaque curly trees, a barn,

cattle, a brook, the dull white of vague orchards in bloom, and perhaps a stone fence

or hills of greenish gouache. But gradually the models of those elementary rusticities

became stranger and stranger to the eye, the nearer I came to know them. Beyond

the tilled plain, beyond the toy roofs, there would be a slow suffusion of inutile

loveliness, a low sun in a platinum haze with a warm, peeled-peach tinge pervading

the upper edge of a two-dimensional, dove-gray cloud fusing with the distant

amorous mist. There might be a line of spaced trees silhouetted against the horizon,

and hot still noons above a wilderness of clover, and Claude Lorrain clouds inscribed

remotely into misty azure with only their cumulus part conspicuous against the

neutral swoon of the background. Or again, it might be a stern El Greco horizon,

pregnant with inky rain, and a passing glimpse of some mummy-necked farmer, and

all around alternating strips of quick-silverish water and harsh green corn, the whole

arrangement opening like a fan, somewhere in Kansas. Now and then, in the

vastness of those plains, huge trees would advance toward us to cluster self-

consciously by the roadside and provide a bit of humanitarian shade above a picnic

table, with sun flecks, flattened paper cups, samaras and discarded ice-cream sticks

littering the brown ground. A great user of roadside facilities, my unfastidious Lo

would be charmed by toilet signs--Guys-Gals, John-Jane, Jack-Jill and even Buck's-

Doe's; while lost in an artist's dream, I would stare at the honest brightness of the

gasoline paraphernalia against the splendid green of oaks, or at a distant hill

scrambling out--scarred but still untamed--from the wilderness of agriculture that

was trying to swallow it. At night, tall trucks studded with colored lights, like dreadful

giant Christmas trees, loomed in the darkness and thundered by the belated little

sedan. And again next day a thinly populated sky, losing its blue to the heat, would

melt overhead, and Lo would clamor for a drink, and her cheeks would hollow

vigorously over the straw, and the car inside would be a furnace when we got in

again, and the road shimmered ahead, with a remote car changing its shape mirage-

like in the surface glare, and seeming to hang for a moment, old-fashionedly square

and high, in the hot haze. And as we pushed westward, patches of what the garage-

man called "sage brush" appeared, and then the mysterious outlines of table-like

hills, and then red bluffs ink-blotted with junipers, and then a mountain range, dun

grading into blue, and blue into dream, and the desert would meet us with a steady

gale, dust, gray thorn bushes, and hideous bits of tissue paper mimicking pale

flowers among the prickles of wind-tortured withered stalks all along the highway; in

the middle of which there sometimes stood simple cows, immobilized in a position

(tail left, white eyelashes right) cutting across all human rules of traffic. My lawyer

has suggested I give a clear, frank account of the itinerary we followed, and I

suppose I have reached here a point where I cannot avoid that chore. Roughly,

during that mad year (August 1947 to August 1948), our route began with a series

of wiggles and whorls in New England, then meandered south, up and down, east

and west; dipped deep into ce qu'on appelle Dixieland, avoided Florida because the

Farlows were there, veered west, zigzagged through corn belts and cotton belts (this

is not too clear I am afraid, Clarence, but I did not keep any notes, and have at my

disposal only an atrociously crippled tour book in three volumes, almost a symbol of

my torn and tattered past, in which to check these recollections); crossed and

recrossed the Rockies, straggled through southern deserts where we wintered;

reached the Pacific, turned north through the pale lilac fluff of flowering shrubs along

forest roads; almost reached the Canadian border; and proceeded east, across good

lands and bad lands, back to agriculture on a grand scale, avoiding, despite little Lo's

strident remonstrations, little Lo's birthplace, in a corn, coal and hog producing area;

and finally returned to the fold of the East, petering out in the college town of

Beardsley.



2

Now, in perusing what follows, the reader should bear in mind not only the general

circuit as adumbrated above, with its many sidetrips and tourist traps, secondary

circles and skittish deviations, but also the fact that far from being an indolent partie

de plaisir, our tour was a hard, twisted, teleological growth, whose sole raison d'jtre

(these French clichis are symptomatic) was to keep my companion in passable

humor from kiss to kiss. Thumbing through that battered tour book, I dimly evoke

that Magnolia Garden in a southern state which cost me four bucks and which,

according to the ad in the book, you must visit for three reasons: because John

Galsworthy (a stone-dead writer of sorts) acclaimed it as the world's fairest garden;

because in 1900 Baedeker's Guide had marked it with a star; and finally, because . .

. O, Reader, My Reader, guess! . . . because children (and by Jingo was not my Lolita

a child!) will "walk starry-eyed and reverently through this foretaste of Heaven,

drinking in beauty that can influence a life." "Not mine," said grim Lo, and settled

down on a bench with the fillings of two Sunday papers in her lovely lap. We passed

and re-passed through the whole gamut of American roadside restaurants, from the

lowly Eat with its deer head (dark trace of long tear at inner canthus), "humorous"

picture post cards of the posterior "Kurort" type, impaled guest checks, life savers,

sunglasses, adman visions of celestial sundaes, one half of a chocolate cake under

glass, and several horribly experienced flies zigzagging over the sticky sugar-pour on

the ignoble counter; and all the way to the expensive place with the subdued lights,

preposterously poor table linen, inept waiters (ex-convicts or college boys), the roan

back of a screen actress, the sable eyebrows of her male of the moment, and an

orchestra of zoot-suiters with trumpets. We inspected the world's largest stalagmite

in a cave where three southeastern states have a family reunion; admission by age;

adults one dollar, pubescents sixty cents. A granite obelisk commemorating the

Battle of Blue Licks, with old bones and Indian pottery in the museum nearby, Lo a

dime, very reasonable. The present log cabin boldly simulating the past log cabin

where Lincoln was born. A boulder, with a plaque, in memory of the author of

"Trees" (by now we are in Poplar Cove, N.C., reached by what my kind, tolerant,

usually so restrained tour book angrily calls "a very narrow road, poorly maintained,"

to which, though no Kilmerite, I subscribe). From a hired motor-boat operated by an

elderly, but still repulsively handsome White Russian, a baron they said (Lo's palms

were damp, the little fool), who had known in California good old Maximovich and

Valeria, we could distinguish the inaccessible "millionaires' colony" on an island,

somewhere off the Georgia coast. We inspected further: a collection of European

hotel picture post cards in a museum devoted to hobbies at a Mississippi resort,

where with a hot wave of pride I discovered a colored photo of my father's Mirana,

its striped awnings, its flag flying above the retouched palm trees. "So what?" said

Lo, squinting at the bronzed owner of an expensive car who had followed us into the

Hobby House. Relics of the cotton era. A forest in Arkansas and, on her brown

shoulder, a raised purple-pink swelling (the work of some gnat) which I eased of its

beautiful transparent poison between my long thumbnails and then sucked till I was

gorged on her spicy blood. Bourbon Street (in a town named New Orleans) whose

sidewalks, said the tour book, "may [I liked the "may"] feature entertainment by

pickaninnies who will {I liked the "will" even better] tap-dance for pennies" (what

fun), while "its numerous small and intimate night clubs are thronged with visitors"

(naughty). Collections of frontier lore. Ante-bellum homes with iron-trellis balconies

and hand-worked stairs, the kind down which movie ladies with sun-kissed shoulders

run in rich Technicolor, holding up the fronts of their flounced skirts with both little

hands in that special way, and the devoted Negress shaking her head on the upper

landing. The Menninger Foundation, a psychiatric clinic, just for the heck of it. A

patch of beautifully eroded clay; and yucca blossoms, so pure, so waxy, but lousy

with creeping white flies. Independence, Missouri, the starting point of the Old

Oregon Trail; and Abiliene, Kansas, the home of the Wild Bill Something Rodeo.

Distant mountains. Near mountains. More mountains; bluish beauties never

attainable, or ever turning into inhabited hill after hill; south-eastern ranges,

altitudinal failures as alps go; heart and sky-piercing snow-veined gray colossi of

stone, relentless peaks appearing from nowhere at a turn of the highway; timbered

enormities, with a system of neatly overlapping dark firs, interrupted in places by

pale puffs of aspen; pink and lilac formations, Pharaonic, phallic, "too prehistoric for

words" (blasi Lo); buttes of black lava; early spring mountains with young-elephant

lanugo along their spines; end-of-the-summer mountains, all hunched up, their

heavy Egyptian limbs folded under folds of tawny moth-eaten plush; oatmeal hills,

flecked with green round oaks; a last rufous mountain with a rich rug of lucerne at

its foot. Moreover, we inspected: Little Iceberg Lake, somewhere in Colorado, and

the snow banks, and the cushionets of tiny alpine flowers, and more snow; down

which Lo in red-peaked cap tried to slide, and squealed, and was snowballed by

some youngsters, and retaliated in kind comme on dit. Skeletons of burned aspens,

patches of spired blue flowers. The various items of a scenic drive. Hundreds of

scenic drives, thousands of Bear Creeks, Soda Springs, Painted Canyons. Texas, a

drought-struck plain. Crystal Chamber in the longest cave in the world, children

under 12 free, Lo a young captive. A collection of a local lady's homemade

sculptures, closed on a miserable Monday morning, dust, wind, witherland.

Conception Park, in a town on the Mexican border which I dared not cross. There and

elsewhere, hundreds of gray hummingbirds in the dusk, probing the throats of dim

flowers. Shakespeare, a ghost town in New Mexico, where bad man Russian Bill was

colorfully hanged seventy years ago. Fish hatcheries. Cliff dwellings. The mummy of

a child (Florentine Bea's Indian contemporary). Our twentieth Hell's Canyon. Our

fiftieth Gateway to something or other fide that tour book, the cover of which had

been lost by that time. A tick in my groin. Always the same three old men, in hats

and suspenders, idling away the summer afternoon under the trees near the public

fountain. A hazy blue view beyond railings on a mountain pass, and the backs of a

family enjoying it (with Lo, in a hot, happy, wild, intense, hopeful, hopeless whisper-

-"Look, the McCrystals, please, let's talk to them, please"--let's talk to them,

reader!--"please! I'll do anything you want, oh, please. . ."). Indian ceremonial

dances, strictly commercial. ART: American Refrigerator Transit Company. Obvious

Arizona, pueblo dwellings, aboriginal pictographs, a dinosaur track in a desert

canyon, printed there thirty million years ago, when I was a child. A lanky, six-foot,

pale boy with an active Adam's apple, ogling Lo and her orange-brown bare midriff,

which I kissed five minutes later, Jack. Winter in the desert, spring in the foothills,

almonds in bloom. Reno, a dreary town in Nevada, with a nightlife said to be

"cosmopolitan and mature." A winery in California, with a church built in the shape of

a wine barrel. Death Valley. Scotty's Castle. Works of Art collected by one Rogers

over a period of years. The ugly villas of handsome actresses. R. L. Stevenson's

footprint on an extinct volcano. Mission Dolores: good title for book. Surf-carved

sandstone festoons. A man having a lavish epileptic fit on the ground in Russian

Gulch State Park. Blue, blue Crater Lake. A fish hatchery in Idaho and the State

Penitentiary. Somber Yellowstone Park and its colored hot springs, baby geysers,

rainbows of bubbling mud--symbols of my passion. A herd of antelopes in a wildlife

refuge. Our hundredth cavern, adults one dollar, Lolita fifty cents. A chateau built by

a French marquess in N.D. The Corn Palace in S.D.; and the huge heads of

presidents carved in towering granite. The Bearded Woman read our jingle and now

she is no longer single. A zoo in Indiana where a large troop of monkeys lived on

concrete replica of Christopher Columbus' flagship. Billions of dead, or halfdead, fish-

smelling May flies in every window of every eating place all along a dreary sandy

shore. Fat gulls on big stones as seen from the ferry City of Cheboygan, whose

brown woolly smoke arched and dipped over the green shadow it cast on the

aquamarine lake. A motel whose ventilator pipe passed under the city sewer.

Lincoln's home, largely spurious, with parlor books and period furniture that most

visitors reverently accepted as personal belongings. We had rows, minor and major.

The biggest ones we had took place: at Lacework Cabins, Virginia; on Park Avenue,

Little Rock, near a school; on Milner Pass, 10,759 feet high, in Colorado; at the

corner of Seventh Street and Central Avenue in Phoenix, Arizona; on Third Street,

Los Angeles, because the tickets to some studio or other were sold out; at a motel

called Poplar Shade in Utah, where six pubescent trees were scarcely taller than my

Lolita, and where she asked, yu propos de rien, how long did I think we were going

to live in stuffy cabins, doing filthy things together and never behaving like ordinary

people? On N. Broadway, Burns, Oregon, corner of W. Washington, facing Safeway,

a grocery. In some little town in the Sun Valley of Idaho, before a brick hotel, pale

and flushed bricks nicely mixed, with, opposite, a poplar playing its liquid shadows all

over the local Honor Roll. In a sage brush wilderness, between Pinedale and Farson.

Somewhere in Nebraska, on Main Street, near the First National Bank, established

1889, with a view of a railway crossing in the vista of the street, and beyond that the

white organ pipes of a multiple silo. And on McEwen St., corner of Wheaton Ave., in

a Michigan town bearing his first name. We came to know the curious roadside

species, Hitchhiking Man, Homo pollex of science, with all its many sub-species and

forms; the modest soldier, spic and span, quietly waiting, quietly conscious of khaki's

viatric appeal; the schoolboy wishing to go two blocks; the killer wishing to go two

thousand miles; the mysterious, nervous, elderly gent, with brand-new suitcase and

clipped mustache; a trio of optimistic Mexicans; the college student displaying the

grime of vacational outdoor work as proudly as the name of the famous college

arching across the front of his sweatshirt; the desperate lady whose battery has just

died on her; the clean-cut, glossy-haired, shifty-eyed, white-faced young beasts in

loud shirts and coats, vigorously, almost priapically thrusting out tense thumbs to

tempt lone women or sadsack salesmen with fancy cravings. "Let's take him," Lo

would often plead, rubbing her knees together in a way she had, as some particularly

disgusting pollex, some man of my age and shoulder breadth, with the face yu

claques of unemployed actor, walked backwards, practically in the path of our car.

Oh, I had to keep a very sharp eye on Lo, little limp Lo! Owing perhaps to constant

amorous exercise, she radiated, despite her very childish appearance, some special

languorous glow which threw garage fellows, hotel pages, vacationists, goons in

luxurious cars, maroon morons near blued pools, into fits of concupiscence which

might have tickled my pride, had it not incensed my jealousy. For little Lo was aware

of that glow of hers, and I would often catch her coulant un regard in the direction of

some amiable male, some grease monkey, with a sinewy golden-brown forearm and

watch-braceleted wrist, and hardly had I turned my back to go and buy this very Lo

a lollipop, than I would hear her and the fair mechanic burst into a perfect love song

of wisecracks. When, during our longer stops, I would relax after a particularly

violent morning in bed, and out of the goodness of my lulled heart allow her--

indulgent Hum!--to visit the rose garden or children's library across the street with a

motor court neighbor's plain little Mary and Mary's eight-year-old brother, Lo would

come back an hour late, with barefoot Mary trailing far behind, and the little boy

metamorphosed into two gangling, golden-haired high school uglies, all muscles and

gonorrhea. The reader may well imagine what I answered my pet when--rather

uncertainly, I admit--she would ask me if she could go with Carl and Al here to the

roller-skating rink. I remember the first time, a dusty windy afternoon, I did let her

go to one such rink. Cruelly she said it would be no fun if I accompanied her, since

that time of day was reserved for teenagers. We wrangled out a compromise: I

remained in the car, among other (empty) cars with their noses to the canvas-

topped open-air rink, where some fifty young people, many in pairs, were endlessly

rolling round and round to mechanical music, and the wind silvered the trees. Dolly

wore blue jeans and white high shoes, as most of the other girls did. I kept counting

the revolutions of the rolling crowd--and suddenly she was missing. When she rolled

past again, she was together with three hoodlums whom I had heard analyze a

moment before the girl skaters from the outside--and jeer at a lovely leggy young

thing who had arrived clad in red shorts instead of those jeans and slacks. At

inspection stations on highways entering Arizona or California, a policeman's cousin

would peer with such intensity at us that my poor heart wobbled. "Any honey?" he

would inquire, and every time my sweet fool giggled. I still have, vibrating all along

my optic nerve, visions of Lo on horseback, a link in the chain of a guided trip along

a bridle trail: Lo bobbing at a walking pace, with an old woman rider in front and a

lecherous red-necked dude-rancher behind; and I behind him, hating his fat flowery-

shirted back even more fervently than a motorist does a slow truck on a mountain

road. Or else, at a ski lodge, I would see her floating away from me, celestial and

solitary, in an ethereal chairlift, up and up, to a glittering summit where laughing

athletes stripped to the waist were waiting for her, for her. In whatever town we

stopped I would inquire, in my polite European way, anent the whereabouts of

natatoriums, museums, local schools, the number of children in the nearest school

and so forth; and at school bus time, smiling and twitching a little (I discovered this

tic nerveux because cruel Lo was the first to mimic it), I would park at a strategic

point, with my vagrant schoolgirl beside me in the car, to watch the children leave

school--always a pretty sight. This sort of thing soon began to bore my so easily

bored Lolita, and, having a childish lack of sympathy for other people's whims, she

would insult me and my desire to have her caress me while blue-eyed little brunettes

in blue shorts, copperheads in green boleros, and blurred boyish blondes in faded

slacks passed by in the sun. As a sort of compromise, I freely advocated whenever

and wherever possible the use of swimming pools with other girl-children. She

adored brilliant water and was a remarkably smart diver. Comfortably robed, I would

settle down in the rich post-meridian shade after my own demure dip, and there I

would sit, with a dummy book or a bag of bonbons, or both, or nothing but my

tingling glands, and watch her gambol, rubber-capped, bepearled, smoothly tanned,

as glad as an ad, in her trim-fitted satin pants and shirred bra. Pubescent

sweetheart! How smugly would I marvel that she was mine, mine, mine, and revise

the recent matitudinal swoon to the moan of the mourning doves, and devise the

late afternoon one, and slitting my sun-speared eyes, compare Lolita to whatever

other nymphets parsimonious chance collected around her for my anthological

delectation and judgment; and today, putting my hand on my ailing heart, I really do

not think that any of them ever surpassed her in desirability, or if they did, it was so

two or three times at the most, in a certain light, with certain perfumes blended in

the air--once in the hopeless case of a pale Spanish child, the daughter of a heavy-

jawed nobleman, and another time--mais je divague. Naturally, I had to be always

wary, fully realizing, in my lucid jealousy, the danger of those dazzling romps. I had

only to turn away for a moment--to walk, say, a few steps in order to see if our cabin

was at last ready after the morning change of linen--and Lo and Behold, upon

returning, I would find the former, les yeux perdus, dipping and kicking her long-

toed feet in the water on the stone edge of which she lolled, while, on either side of

her, there crouched a brun adolescent whom her russet beauty and the quicksilver in

the baby folds of her stomach were sure to cause to se tordre--oh Baudelaire!--in

recurrent dreams for months to come. I tried to teach her to play tennis so we might

have more amusements in common; but although I had been a good player in my

prime, I proved to be hopeless as a teacher; and so, in California, I got her to take a

number of very expensive lessons with a famous coach, a husky, wrinkled old-timer,

with a harem of ball boys; he looked an awful wreck off the court, but now and then,

when, in the course of a lesson, to keep up the exchange, he would put out as it

were an exquisite spring blossom of a stroke and twang the ball back to his pupil,

that divine delicacy of absolute power made me recall that, thirty years before, I had

seen him in Cannes demolish the great Gobbert! Until she began taking those

lessons, I thought she would never learn the game. On this or that hotel court I

would drill Lo, and try to relive the days when in a hot gale, a daze of dust, and

queer lassitude, I fed ball after ball to gay, innocent, elegant Annabel (gleam of

bracelet, pleated white skirt, black velvet hair band). With every word of persistent

advice I would only augment Lo's sullen fury. To our games, oddly enough, she

preferred--at least, before we reached California--formless pat ball approximations--

more ball hunting than actual play--with a wispy, weak, wonderfully pretty in an

ange gauche way coeval. A helpful spectator, I would go up to that other child, and

inhale her faint musky fragrance as I touched her forearm and held her knobby

wrist, and push this way or that her cool thigh to show her the back-hand stance. In

the meantime, Lo, bending forward, would let her sunny-brown curls hang forward

as she stuck her racket, like a cripple's stick, into the ground and emitted a

tremendous ugh of disgust at my intrusion. I would leave them to their game and

look on, comparing their bodies in motion, a silk scarf round my throat; this was in

south Arizona, I think--and the days had a lazy lining warmth, and awkward Lo

would slash at the ball and miss it, and curse, and send a simulacrum of a serve into

the net, and show the wet glistening young down of her armpit as she brandished

her racket in despair, and her even more insipid partner would dutifully rush out

after every ball, and retrieve none; but both were enjoying themselves beautifully,

and in clear ringing tones kept the exact score of their ineptitudes all the time. One

day, I remember, I offered to bring them cold drinks from the hotel, and went up the

gravel path, and came back with two tall glasses of pineapple juice, soda and ice;

and then a sudden void within my chest made me stop as I saw that the tennis court

was deserted. I stooped to set down the glasses on a bench and for some reason,

with a kind of icy vividness, saw Charlotte's face in death, and I glanced around, and

noticed Lo in white shorts receding through the speckled shadow of a garden path in

the company of a tall man who carried two tennis rackets. I sprang after them, but

as I was crashing through the shrubbery, I saw, in an alternate vision, as if life's

course constantly branched, Lo, in slacks, and her companion, in shorts, trudging up

and down a small weedy area, and beating bushes with their rackets in listless

search for their last lost ball. I itemize these sunny nothings mainly to prove to my

judges that I did everything in my power to give my Lolita a really good time. How

charming it was to see her, a child herself, showing another child some of her few

accomplishments, such as for example a special way of jumping rope. With her right

hand holding her left arm behind her untanned back, the lesser nymphet, a

diaphanous darling, would be all eyes, as the pavonine sun was all eyes on the

gravel under the flowering trees, while in the midst of that oculate paradise, my

freckled and raffish lass skipped, repeating the movements of so many others I had

gloated over on the sun-shot, watered, damp-smelling sidewalks and ramparts of

ancient Europe. Presently, she would hand the rope back to her little Spanish friend,

and watch in her turn the repeated lesson, and brush away the hair from her brow,

and fold her arms, and step on one toe with the other, or drop her hands loosely

upon her still unflared hips, and I would satisfy myself that the damned staff had at

last finished cleaning up our cottage; whereupon, flashing a smile to the shy, dark-

haired page girl of my princess and thrusting my fatherly fingers deep into Lo's hair

from behind, and then gently but firmly clasping them around the nape of her neck, I

would lead my reluctant pet to our small home for a quick connection before dinner.

"Whose cat has scratched poor you?" A full-blown fleshy handsome woman of the

repulsive type to which I was particularly attractive might ask me at the "lodge,"

during a table d'hote dinner followed by dancing promised to Lo. This was one of the

reasons why I tried to keep as far away from people as possible, while Lo, on the

other hand, would do her utmost to draw as many potential witnesses into her orbit

as she could. She would be, figuratively speaking wagging her tiny tail, her whole

behind in fact as little bitches do--while some grinning stranger accosted us and

began a bright conversation with a comparative study of license plates. "Long way

from home!" Inquisitive parents, in order to pump Lo about me, would suggest her

going to a movie with their children. We had some close shaves. The waterfall

nuisance pursued me of course in all our caravansaries. But I never realized how

wafery their wall substance was until one evening, after I had loved too loudly, a

neighbor's masculine cough filled the pause as clearly as mine would have done; and

next morning as I was having breakfast at the milk bar (Lo was a late sleeper, and I

liked to bring her a pot of hot coffee in bed), my neighbor of the eve, an elderly fool

wearing plain glasses on his long virtuous nose and a convention badge on his lapel,

somehow managed to rig up a conversation with me, in the course of which he

inquired, if my missus was like his missus a rather reluctant get-upper when not on

the farm; and had not the hideous danger I was skirting almost suffocated me, I

might have enjoyed the odd look of surprise on his thin-lipped weather-beaten face

when I dryly answered, as I slithered off my stool, that I was thank God a widower.

How sweet it was to bring that coffee to her, and then deny it until she had done her

morning duty. And I was such a thoughtful friend, such a passionate father, such a

good pediatrician, attending to all the wants of my little auburn brunette's body! My

only grudge against nature was that I could not turn my Lolita inside out and apply

voracious lips to her young matrix, her unknown heart, her nacreous liver, the sea-

grapes of her lungs, her comely twin kidneys. On especially tropical afternoons, in

the sticky closeness of the siesta, I liked the cool feel of armchair leather against my

massive nakedness as I held her in my lap. There she would be, a typical kid picking

her nose while engrossed in the lighter sections of a newspaper, as indifferent to my

ecstasy as if it were something she had sat upon, a shoe, a doll, the handle of a

tennis racket, and was too indolent to remove. Her eyes would follow the adventures

of her favorite strip characters: there was one well-drawn sloppy bobby-soxer, with

high cheekbones and angular gestures, that I was not above enjoying myself; she

studied the photographic results of head-on collisions; she never doubted the reality

of place, time, and circumstance alleged to match the publicity pictures of naked-

thighed beauties; and she was curiously fascinated by the photographs of local

brides, some in full wedding apparel, holding bouquets and wearing glasses. A fly

would settle and walk in the vicinity of her navel or explore her tender pale areolas.

She tried to catch it in her fist (Charlotte's method) and then would turn to the

column Let's Explore Your Mind. "Let's explore your mind. Would sex crimes be

reduced if children obeyed a few don'ts? Don't play around public toilets. Don't take

candy or rides from strangers. If picked up, mark down the license of the car." ". . .

and the brand of the candy," I volunteered. She went on, her cheek (recedent)

against mine (pursuant); and this was a good day, mark, O reader! "If you don't

have a pencil, but are old enough to read--" "We," I quip-quoted, "medieval

mariners, have placed in this bottle--" "If," she repeated, "you don't have a pencil,

but are old enough to read and write--this is what the guy means, isn't it, you dope--

=scratch the number somehow on the roadside." "With your little claws, Lolita." She

had entered my world, umber and black Humberland, with rash curiosity; she

surveyed it with a shrug of amused distaste; and it seemed to me now that she was

ready to turn away from it with something akin to plain repulsion. Never did she

vibrate under my touch, and a strident "what d'you think you are doing?" was all I

got for my pains. To the wonderland I had to offer, my fool preferred the corniest

movies, the most cloying fudge. To think that between a Hamburger and a

Humburger, she would--invariably, with icy precision--plump for the former. There is

nothing more atrociously cruel than an adored child. Did I mention the name of that

milk bar I visited a moment ago? It was, of all things, The Frigid Queen. Smiling a

little sadly, I dubbed her My Frigid Princess. She did not see the wistful joke. Oh, do

not scowl at me, reader, I do not intend to convey the impressin that I did not

manage to be happy. Readeer must understand that in the possession and thralldom

of a nymphet the enchanted traveler stands, as it were, beyond happiness. For there

is no other bliss on earth comparable to that of fondling a nymphet. It is hors

concours, that bliss, it belongs to another class, another plane of sensitivity. Despite

our tiffs, despite her nastiness, despite all the fuss and faces she made, and the

vulgarity, and the danger, and the horrible hopelessness of it all, I still dwelled deep

in my elected paradise--a paradise whose skies were the color of hell-flames--but

still a paradise. The able psychiatrist who studies my case--and whom by now Dr.

Humbert has plunged, I trust, into a state of leporine fascination--is no doubt

anxious to have me take Lolita to the seaside and have me find there, at last, the

"gratification" of a lifetime urge, and release from the "subconscious" obsession of an

incomplete childhood romance with the initial little Miss Lee. Well, comrade, let me

tell you that I did look for a beach, though I also have to confess that by the time we

reached its mirage of gray water, so many delights had already been granted me by

my traveling companion that the search for a Kingdom by the Sea, a Sublimated

Riviera, or whatnot, far from being the impulse of the subconscious, had become the

rational pursuit of a purely theoretical thrill. The angels knew it, and arranged things

accordingly. A visit to a plausible cove on the Atlantic side was completely messed up

by foul weather. A thick damp sky, muddy waves, a sense of boundless but

somehow matter-of-fact mist--what could be further removed from the crisp charm,

the sapphire occasion and rosy contingency of my Riviera romance? A couple of

semitropical beaches on the Gulf, though bright enough, were starred and spattered

by venomous beasties and swept by hurricane winds. Finally, on a Californian beach,

facing the phantom of the Pacific, I hit upon some rather perverse privacy in a kind

of cave whence you could hear the shrikes of a lot of girl scouts taking their first surf

bath on a separate part of the beach, behind rotting trees; but the fog was like a wet

blanket, and the sand was gritty and clammy, and Lo was all gooseflesh and grit,

and for the first time in my life I had as little desire for her as for a manatee.

Perhaps, my learned readers may perk up if I tell them that even had we discovered

a piece of sympathetic seaside somewhere, it would have come too late, since my

real liberation had occurred much earlier: at the moment, in point of fact, when

Annabel Haze, alias Dolores Lee, alias Loleeta, had appeared tome, golden and

brown, kneeling, looking up, on that shoddy veranda, in a kind of fictitious,

dishonest, but eminently satisfactory seaside arrangement (although there was

nothing but a second-rate lake in the neighborhood.). So much for those special

sensations, influence, if not actually brought about, by the tenets of modern

psychiatry. Consequently, I turned away--I headed my Lolita away--from beaches

which were either too bleak when lone, or too populous when ablaze. However, in

recollection, I suppose, of my hopeless hauntings of public parks in Europe, I was

still keenly interested in outdoor activities and desirous of finding suitable

playgrounds in the open where I had suffered such shameful privations. Here, too, I

was to be thwarted. The disappointment I must now register (as I gently grade my

story into an expression of the continuous risk and dread that ran through my bliss)

should in no wise reflect on the lyrical, epic, tragic but never Arcadian American

wilds. They are beautiful, heart-rendingly beautiful, those wilds, with a quality of

wide-eyed, unsung, innocent surrender that my lacquered, toy-bright Swiss villages

and exhaustively lauded Alps no longer possess. Innumerable lovers have clipped

and kissed on the trim turf of old-would mountainsides, on the innerspring moss, by

a handy, hygienic rill, on rustic benches under the initialed oaks, and in so many

cabanes in so many beech forests. But in the Wilds of America the open-air lover will

not find it easy to indulge in the most ancient of all crimes and pastimes. Poisonous

plants burn his sweetheart's buttocks, nameless insects sting his; sharp items of the

forest floor prick his knees, insects hers; and all around there abides a sustained

rustle of potential snakes--que dis-je, of semi-extinct dragons!--while the crablike

seeds of ferocious flowers cling, in a hideous green crust, to gartered black sock and

sloppy white sock alike. I am exaggerating a little. One summer noon, just below

timberline, where heavenly-hued blossoms that I would fain call larkspur crowded all

along a purly moutain brook, we did find, Lolita and I, a secluded romantic spot, a

hundred feet or so above the pass where we had left our car. The slope seemed

untrodden. A last panting pine was taking a well-earned breather on the rock it had

reached. A marmot whistled at us and withdrew. Beneath the lap-robe I had spread

fo Lo, dryflowers crepitated softly. Venus came and went. The jagged cliff crowning

the upper talus and a tangle of shrugs growing below us seemed to offer us

protection from sun and man alike. Alas, I had not reckoned with a faint side trail

that curled up in cagey fashion among the shrubs and rocks a few feet from us. It

was then that we came close to detection than ever before, and no wonder the

experience curbed forever my yearning for rural amours. I remember the operation

was over, all over, and she was weeping in my arms;--a salutory storm of sobs after

one of the fits of moodiness that had become so frequent with her in the course of

that otherwise admirable year! I had just retracted some silly promise she had forced

me to make in a moment of blind impatient passion, and thee she was sprawling and

sobbing, and pinching my caressing hand, and I was laughing happily, and the

atrocious, unbelievable, unbearable, and, I suspect, eternal horror that I know now

was still but a dot of blackness in the blue of my bliss; and so we lay, when with one

of those jolts that have ended by knocking my poor heart out of its groove, I met the

unblinking dark eyes of two strange and beautiful children, faunlet and nymphet,

whom their identical flat dark hair and bloodless cheeks proclaimed siblings if not

twins. They stood crouching and gaping at us, both in blue playsuits, blending with

the mountain blossoms. I plucked at the lap-robe for desperate concealment--and

within the same instant, something that looked like a polka-dotted pushball among

the undergrowth a few paces away, went into a turning motion which was

transformed into the gradually rising figure of a stout lady with a raven-black bob,

who automatically added a wild lily to her bouquet, while staring over her shoulder at

us from behind her lovely carved bluestone children. Now that I have an altogether

different mess on my conscience, I know that I am a courageous man, but in those

days I was not aware of it, and I remember being surprised by my own coolness.

With the quiet murmured order one gives a sweat-stained distracted cringing trained

animal even in the worst of plights (what mad hope or hate makes the young beast's

flanks pulsate, what black stars pierce the heart of the tamer!), I made Lo get up,

and we decorously walked, and then indecorously scuttled down to the car. Behind it

a nifty station wagon was parked, and a handsome Assyrian with a little blue-black

beard, un monsieur trhs bien, in silk shirt and magenta slacks, presumably the

corpulent botanist's husband, was gravely taking the picture of a signboard giving

the altitude of the pass. It was well over 10,000 feet and I was quite out of breath;

and with a scrunch and a skid we drove off, Lo still struggling with her clothes and

swearing at me in language that I never dreamed little girls could know, let alone

use. There were other unpleasant incidents. There was the movie theatre once, for

example. Lo at the time still had for the cinema a veritable passion (it was to decline

into tepid condescension during her second high school year). We took in,

voluptuously and indiscriminately, oh, I don't know, one hundred and fifty or two

hundred programs during that one year, and during some of the denser periods of

movie-going we saw many of the newsreels up to half-a-dozen times since the same

weekly one went with different main pictures and pursued us from town to town. Her

favorite kinds were, in this order: musicals, underworlders, westerners. In the first,

real singers and dancers had unreal stage careers in an essentially grief-proof sphere

of existence wherefrom death and truth were banned, and where, at the end, white-

haired, dewy-eyed, technically deathless, the initially reluctant father of a show-

crazy girl always finished by applauding her apotheosis on fabulous Broadway. The

underworld was a world apart: there, heroic newspapermen were tortured, telephone

bills ran to billions, and, in a robust atmosphere of incompetent marksmanship,

villains were chased through sewers and store-houses by pathologically fearless cops

(I was to give them less exercise). Finally there was the mahogany landscape, the

florid-faced, blue-eyed roughriders, the prim pretty schoolteacher arriving in Roaring

Gulch, the rearing horse, the spectacular stampede, the pistol thrust through the

shivered windowpane, the stupendous fist fight, the crashing mountain of dusty old-

fashioned furniture, the table used as a weapon, the timely somersault, the pinned

hand still groping for the dropped bowie knife, the grunt, the sweet crash of fist

against chin, the kick in the belly, the flying tackle; and immediately after a plethora

of pain that would have hospitalized a Hercules (I should know by now), nothing to

show but the rather becoming bruise on the bronzed cheek of the warmed-up hero

embracing his gorgeous frontier bride. I remember one matinee in a small airless

theatre crammed with children and reeking with the hot breath of popcorn. The

moon was yellow above the neckerchiefed crooner, and his finger was on his

strumstring, and his foot was on a pine log, and I had innocently encircled Lo's

shoulder and approached my jawbone to her temple, when two harpies behind us

started muttering the queerest things--I do not know if I understood aright, but what

I thought I did, made me withdraw my gentle hand, and of course the rest of the

show was fog to me. Another jolt I remember is connected with a little burg we were

traversing at night, during our return journey. Some twenty miles earlier I had

happened to tell her that the day school she would attend at Beardsley was a rather

high-class, non-coeducational one, with no modern nonsense, whereupon Lo treated

me to one of those furious harangues of hers where entreaty and insult, self-

assertion and double talk, vicious vulgarity and childish despair, were interwoven in

an exasperating semblance of logic which prompted a semblance of explanation from

me. Enmeshed in her wild words (swell chance . . . I'd be a sap if I took your opinion

seriously . . . Stinker . . . You can't boss me . . . I despise you . . . and so forth), I

drove through the slumbering town at a fifty-mile-per-hour pace in continuance of

my smooth highway swoosh, and a twosome of patrolmen put their spotlight on the

car, and told me to pull over. I shushed Lo who was automatically raving on. The

men peered at her and me with malevolent curiosity. Suddenly all dimples, she

beamed sweetly at them, as she never did at my orchideous masculinity; for, in a

sense, my Lo was even more scared of the law than I--and when the kind officers

pardoned us and servilely we crawled on, her eyelids closed and fluttered as she

mimicked limp prostration. At this point I have a curious confession to make. You will

laugh--but really and truly I somehow never managed to find out quite exactly what

the legal situation was. I do not know it yet. Oh, I have learned a few odds and

ends. Alabama prohibits a guardian from changing the ward's residence without an

order of the court; Minnesota, to whom I take off my hat, provides that when a

relative assumes permanent care and custody of any child under fourteen, the

authority of a court does not come into play. Query: is the stepfather of a gaspingly

adorable pubescent pet, a stepfather of only one month's standing, a neurotic

widower of mature years and small but independent means, with the parapets of

Europe, a divorce and a few madhouses behind him, is he to be considered a

relative, and thus a natural guardian? And if not, must I, and could I reasonably dare

notify some Welfare Board and file a petition (how do you file a petition?), and have

a court's agent investigate meek, fishy me and dangerous Dolores Haze? The many

books on marriage, rape, adoption and so on, that I guiltily consulted at the public

libraries of big and small towns, told me nothing beyond darkly insinuating that the

state is the super-guardian of minor children. Pilvin and Zapel, if I remember their

names right, in an impressive volume on the legal side of marriage, completely

ignored stepfathers with motherless girls on their hands and knees. My best friend, a

social service monograph(Chicago, 1936), which was dug out for me at great pains

form a dusty storage recess by an innocent old spinster, said "There is no principle

that every minor must have a guardian; the court is passive and enters the fray only

when the child's situation becomes conspicuously perilous." A guardian, I concluded,

was appointed only when he expressed his solemn and formal desire; but months

might elapse before he was given notice to appear at a hearing and grow his pair of

gray wings, and in the meantime the fair demon child was legally left to her own

devices which, after all, was the case of Dolores Haze. Then came the hearing. A few

questions from the bench, a few reassuring answers from the attorney, a smile, a

nod, a light drizzle outside, and the appointment was made. And still I dared not.

Keep away, be a mouse, curl up in yourhole. Courts became extravagantly active

only when there was some monetary question involved: two greedy guardians, a

robbed orphan, a third, still greedier, party. But here all was in perfect order, and

inventory had been made, and her mother's small property was waiting untouched

for Dolores Haze to grow up. The best policy seemed to be to refrain from any

application. Or would some busybody, some Humane Society, butt in if I kept too

quiet? Friend Farlow, who was a lawyer of sorts and ought to have been able to give

me some solid advice, was too much occupied with Jean's cancer to do anything

more than what he had promised--namely, to look after Chrlotte's meager estate

while I recovered very gradually from the shock of her death. I had conditioned him

into believing Dolores was my natural child, and so could not expect him to bother

his head about the situation. I am, as the reader must have gathered by now, a poor

businessman; but neither ignorance nor indolence should have prevented me from

seeking professional advice elsewhere. What stopped me was the awful feeling that if

I meddled with fate in any way and tried to rationalize her fantastic gift, that gift

would be snatched away like that palace on the mountain top in the Oriental tale

which vanished whenever a prospective owner asked its custodian how come a strip

of sunset sky was clearly visible from afar between black rock and foundation. I

decided that at Beardsley (the site of Bearsley College for Women) I would have

access to works of reference that I had not yet been able to study, such as

Woerner's Treatise "On the American Law of Guardianship" and certain United States

Children's Bureau Publications. I also decided that anything was better for Lo than

the demoralizing idleness in which she lived. I could persuade her to do so many

things--their list might stupefy a professional educator; but no matter how I pleaded

or stormed, I could never make her read any other book than the so-called comic

books or stories in magazines for American females. Any literature a peg higher

smacked to her of school, and though theoretically willing to enjoy A Girl of the

Limberlost or the Arabian Nights, or Little Women, she was quite sure she would not

fritter away her "vacation" on such highbrow reading matter. I now think it was a

great mistake to move east again and have her go to that private school in

Beardsley, instead of somehow scrambling across the Mexican border while the

scrambling was good so as to lie low for a couple of years in subtropical bliss until I

could safely marry my little Creole; for I must confess that depending on the

condition of my glands and ganglia, I could switch in the course of the same day

from one pole of insanity to the other--from the thought that around 1950 I would

have to get rid somehow of a difficult adolescent whose magic nymphage had

evaporated--to the thought that with patience and luck might have her produce

eventually a nymphet with my blood in her exquisite veins, a Lolita the Second, who

would be eight or nine around 1960, when I would still be dans la force de l'bge;

indeed, the telescopy of my mind, or un-mind, was strong enough to distinguish in

the remoteness of time a vieillard encore vert--or was it green rot?--bizarre, tender,

salivating Dr. Humbert, practicing on supremely lovely Lolita the Third the art of

being a granddad. In the days of that wild journey of ours, I doubted not that as

father to Lolita the First I was a ridiculous failure. I did my best; I read and reread a

book with the unintentionally biblical title Know Your Own Daughter, which I got at

the same store where I bought Lo, for her thirteenth birthday, a de luxe volume with

commercially "beautiful" illustrations, of Andersen's The Little Mermaid. But even at

our very best moments, when we sat reading on a rainy day (Lo's glance skipping

from the window to her wrist watch and back again), or had a quiet hearty meal in a

crowded diner, or played a childish game of cards, or went shopping, or silently

stared, with other motorists and their children, at some smashed, blood-bespattered

car with a young woman's shoe in the ditch (Lo, as we drove on: "that was the exact

type of moccasin I was trying to describe to that jerk in the store"); on all those

random occasions, I seemed to myself as implausible a father as she seemed to be a

daughter. Was, perhaps, guilty locomotion instrumental in vitiating our powers of

impersonation? Would improvement be forthcoming with a fixed domicile and a

routine schoolgirl's day? In my choice of Beardsley I was guided not only by the fact

of there being a comparatively sedate school for girls located there, but also by the

presence of the women's college. In my desire to get myself casi, to attach myself

somehow to some patterned surface which my stripes would blend with, I thought of

a man I knew in the department of French at Beardsley College; he was good

enough to use my textbook in his classes and had attempted to get me over once to

deliver a lecture. I had no intention of doing so, since, as I have once remarked in

the course of these confessions, there are few physiques I loathe more than the

heavy low-slung pelvis, thick calves and deplorable complexion of the average coed

(in whom I see, maybe, the coffin of coarse female flesh within which my nymphets

are buried alive); but I did crave for a label, a background, and a simulacrum, and,

as presently will become clear, there was a reason, a rather zany reason, why old

Gaston Godin's company would be particularly safe. Finally, there was the money

question. My income was cracking under the strain of our joy-ride. True, I clung to

the cheaper motor courts; but every now and then, there would be a loud hotel de

luxe, or a pretentious dude ranch, to mutilate our budget; staggering sums,

moreover, were expended on sightseeing and Lo's clothes, and the old Haze bus,

although a still vigorous and very devoted machine, necessitated numerous minor

and major repairs. In one of our strip maps that has happened to survive among the

papers which the authorities have so kindly allowed me to use for the purpose of

writing my statement, I find some jottings that help me compute the following.

During that extravagant year 1947-1948, August to August, lodgings and food cost

us around 5,500 dollars; gas, oil and repairs, 1,234, and various extras almost as

much; so that during about 150 days of actual motion (we covered about 27,000

miles!) plus some 200 days of interpolated standstills, this modest rentier spent

around 8,000 dollars, or better say 10,000 because, unpractical as I am, I have

surely forgotten a number of items. And so we rolled East, I more devastated than

braced with the satisfaction of my passion, and she glowing with health, her bi-iliac

garland still as brief as a lad's, although she had added two inches to her stature and

eight pounds to her weight. We had been everywhere. We had really seen nothing.

And I catch myself thinking that our long journey had only defiled with a sinuous trail

of slime the lovely, trustful, dreamy, enormous country that by then, in retrospect,

was no more to us than a collection of dog-eared maps, ruined tour books, old tires,

and her sobs in the night--every night, every night--the moment I feigned sleep.



4

When, through decorations of light and shade, we drove to 14 Thayer Street, a grave

little lad met us with the keys and a note from Gaston who had rented the house for

us. My Lo, without granting her new surroundings one glance, unseeingly turned on

the radio to which instinct led her and lay down on the living room sofa with a batch

of old magazines which in the same precise and blind manner she landed by dipping

her hand into the nether anatomy of a lamp table. I really did not mind where to

dwell provided I could lock my Lolita up somewhere; but I had, I suppose, in the

course of my correspondence with vague Gaston, vaguely visualized a house of ivied

brick. Actually the place bore a dejected resemblance to the Haze home (a mere 400

distant): it was the same sort of dull gray frame affair with a shingled roof and dull

green drill awnings; and the rooms, though smaller and furnished in a more

consistent plush-and-plate style, were arranged in much the same order. My study

turned out to be, however, a much larger room, lined from floor to ceiling with some

two thousand books on chemistry which my landlord (on sabbatical leave for the

time being) taught at Beardsley College. I had hoped Beardsley School for girls, an

expensive day school, with lunch thrown in and a glamorous gymnasium, would,

while cultivating all those young bodies, provide some formal education for their

minds as well. Gaston Godin, who was seldom right in his judgment of American

habitus, had warned me that the institution might turn out to be one of those where

girls are taught, as he put it with a foreigner's love for such things: "not to spell very

well, but to smell very well." I don't think they achieved even that. At my first

interview with headmistress Pratt, she approved of my child's "nice blue eyes" (blue!

Lolita!) and of my own friendship with that "French genius" (a genius! Gaston!)--and

then, having turned Dolly over to a Miss Cormorant, she wrinkled her brow in a kind

of recueillement and said: "We are not so much concerned, Mr. Humbird, with having

our students become bookworms or be able to reel off all the capitals of Europe

which nobody knows anyway, or learn by heart the dates of forgotten battles. What

we are concerned with is the adjustment of the child to group life. This is why we

stress the four D's: Dramatics, Dance, Debating and Dating. We are confronted by

certain facts. Your delightful Dolly will presently enter an age group where dates,

dating, date dress, date book, date etiquette, mean as much to her as, say,

business, business connections, business success, mean to you, or as much as

[smiling] the happiness of my girls means to me. Dorothy Humbird is already

involved in a whole system of social life which consists, whether we like it or not, of

hot-dog stands, corner drugstores, malts and cokes, movies, square-dancing,

blanket parties on beaches, and even hair-fixing parties! Naturally at Beardsley

School we disapprove of some of these activities; and we rechannel others into more

constructive directions. But we do try to turn our backs on the fog and squarely face

the sunshine. To put it briefly, while adopting certain teaching techniques, we are

more interested in communication than in composition. That is, with due respect to

Shakespeare and others, we want our girls to communicate freely with the live world

around them rather than plunge into musty old books. We are still groping perhaps,

but we grope intelligently, like a gynecologist feeling a tumor. We thing, Dr.

Humburg, in organissmal and organizational terms. We have done away with the

mass or irrelevant topics that have traditionally been presented to young girls,

leaving no place, in former days, for the knowledges and the skills, and the attitudes

they will need in managing their lives and--as the cynic might add--the lives of their

husbands. Mr. Humberson, let us put it this way: the position of a star is important,

but the most practical spot for an icebox in the kitchen may be even more important

to the budding housewife. You say that all you expect a child to obtain from school is

a sound education. But what do we mean by education? In the old days it was in the

main a verbal phenomenon; I mean, you could have a child learn by heart a good

encyclopedia and he or she would know as much as or more than a school could

offer. Dr. Hummer, do you realize that for the modern pre-adolescent child, medieval

dates are of less vital value than weekend ones [twinkle]?--to repeat a pun that I

heard the Beardsley college psychoanalyst permit herself the other day. We live not

only in a world of thoughts, but also in a world of things. Wrds without experience

are meaningless. What on earth can Dorothy Hummerson care for Greece and the

Orient with their harems and slaves?" This program rather appalled me, but I spoke

to two intelligent ladies who had been connected with the school, and they affirmed

that the girls did quite a bit of sound reading and that the "communication" line was

more or less ballyhoo aimed at giving old-fashioned Beardsley School a financially

remunerative modern touch, though actually it remained as prim as a prawn.

Another reason attracting me to that particular school may seem funny to some

readers, but it was very important to me, for that is the way I am made. Across our

street, exactly in front of our house, there was, I noticed, a gap of weedy wasteland,

with some colorful bushes and a pile of bricks and a few scattered planks, and the

foam of shabby mauve and chrome autumn roadside flowers; and through that gap

you could see a shimmery section of School Rd., running parallel to our Thayer St.,

and immediately beyond that, the playground of the school Apart from the

psychological comfort this general arrangement should afford me by keeping Dolly's

day adjacent to mine, I immediately foresaw the pleasure I would have in

distinguishing from my study-bedroom, by means of powerful binoculars, the

statistically inevitable percentage of nymphets among the other girl children playing

around Dolly during recess; unfortunately, on the very first day of school, workmen

arrived and put up a fence some way down the gap, and in no time a construction of

tawny wood maliciously arose beyond that fence utterly blocking my magic vista;

and as soon as they had erected a sufficient amount of material to spoil everything,

those absurd builders suspended their work and never appeared again.



5

In a street called Thayer Street, in the residential green, fawn, and golden of a

mellow academic townlet, one was bound to have a few amiable fine-dayers yelping

at you. I prided myself on the exact temperature of my relations with them: never

rude, always aloof. My west-door neighbor, who might have been a businessman or

a college teacher, or both, would speak to me once in a while as he barbered some

late garden blooms or watered his car, or, at a later date, defrosted his driveway (I

don't mind if these verbs are all wrong), but my brief grunts, just sufficiently

articulate to sound like conventional assents or interrogative pause-fillers, precluded

any evolution toward chumminess. Of the two houses flanking the bit of scrubby

waste opposite, one was closed, and the other contained two professors of English,

tweedy and short-haired Miss Lester and fadedly feminine Miss Fabian, whose only

subject of brief sidewalk conversation with me was (God bless their tact!) the young

loveliness of my daughter and the naove charm of Gaston Godin. My east-door

neighbor was by far the most dangerous one, a sharp-nosed stock character whose

late brother had been attached to the College as Superintendent of Buildings and

Grounds. I remember her waylaying Dolly, while I stood at the living room window,

feverishly awaiting my darling's return from school. The odious spinster, trying to

conceal her morbid inquisitiveness under a mask of dulcet goodwill, stood leaning on

her slim umbrella (the sleet had just stopped, a cold wet sun had sidled out), and

Dolly, her brown coat open despite the raw weather, her structural heap of books

pressed against her stomach, her knees showing pink above her clumsy wellingtons,

a sheepish frightened little smile flitting over and off her snub-nosed face, which--

owing perhaps to the pale wintry light--looked almost plain, in a rustic, German,

mdgdlein-like way, as she stood there and dealt with Miss East's questions "And

where is your mother, my dear? And what is your poor father's occupation? And

where did you love before?" Another time the loathsome creature accosted me with a

welcoming whine--but I evaded her; and a few days later there came from her a

note in a blue-margined envelope, a nice mixture of poison and treacle, suggesting

Dolly come over on a Sunday and curl up in a chair to look through the "loads of

beautiful books my dear mother gave me when I was a child, instead of having the

radio on at full blast till all hours of the night." I had also to be careful in regard to a

Mrs. Holigan, a charwoman and cook of sorts whom I had inherited with the vacuum

cleaner from the previous tenants. Dolly got lunch at school, so that this was no

trouble, and I had become adept at providing her with a big breakfast and warming

up the dinner that Mrs. Holigan prepared before leaving. That kindly and harmless

woman had, thank God, a rather bleary eye that missed details, and I had become a

great expert in bedmaking; but still I was continuously obsessed by the feeling that

some fatal stain had been left somewhere, or that, on the rare occasions where

Holigan's presence happened to coincide with Lo's, simple Lo might succumb to

buxom sympathy in the course of a cozy kitchen chat. I often felt we lived in a

lighted house of glass, and any moment some thin-lipped parchment face would peer

through a carelessly unshaded window to obtain a free glimpse of things that the

most jaded voyeur would have paid a small fortune to watch.



6

A word about Gaston Godin. The main reason why I enjoyed--or at least tolerated

with relief--his company was the spell of absolute security that his ample person cast

on my secret. Not that he knew it; I had no special reason to confide in him, and he

was much too self-centered and abstract to notice or suspect anything that might

lead to a frank question on his part and a frank answer on mine. He spoke well of me

to Beardsleyans, he was my good herald. Had he discovered mes goshts and Lolita's

status, it would have interested him only insofar as throwing some light on the

simplicity of my attitude towards him, which attitude was as free of polite strain as it

was of ribald allusions; for despite his colorless mind and dim memory, he was

perhaps aware that I knew more about him than the burghers of Beardsley did. He

was a flabby, dough-faced, melancholy bachelor tapering upward to a pair of narrow,

not quite level shoulders and a conical pear-head which had sleek black hair on one

side and only a few plastered wisps on the other. But the lower part of his body was

enormous, and he ambulated with a curious elephantine stealth by means of

phenomenally stout legs. He always wore black, even his tie was black; he seldom

bathed; his English was a burlesque. And, nonetheless, everybody considered him to

be a supremely lovable, lovably freakish fellow! Neighbors pampered him; he knew

by name all the small boys in our vicinity (he lived a few blocks away from me)and

had some of them clean his sidewalk and burn leaves in his back yard, and bring

wood from his shed, and even perform simple chores about the house, and he would

feed them fancy chocolates, with real liqueurs inside--in the privacy of an orientally

furnished den in his basement, with amusing daggers and pistols arrayed on the

moldy, rug-adorned walls among the camouflaged hot-water pipes. Upstairs he had a

studio--he painted a little, the old fraud. He had decorated its sloping wall (it was

really not more than a garret) with large photographs of pensive Andri Gide,

Tchaokovsky, Norman Douglas, two other well-known English writers, Nijinsky (all

thighs and fig leaves), Harold D. Doublename (a misty-eyed left-wing professor at a

Midwesten university) and Marcel Proust. All these poor people seemed about to fall

on you from their inclined plane. He had also an album with snapshots of all the

Jackies and Dickies of the neighborhood, and when I happened to thumb through it

and make some casual remark, Gaston would purse his fat lips and murmur with a

wistful pout "Oui, ils sont gentils." His brown eyes would roam around the various

sentimental and artistic bric-a-brac present, and his own banal toiles (the

conventionally primitive eyes, sliced guitars, blue nipples and geometrical designs of

the day), and with a vague gesture toward a painted wooden bowl or veined vase,

he would say "Prenez donc une de ces poires. La bonne dame d'en face m'en offre

plus que je n'en peux savourer." Or: "Mississe Taille Lore vient de me donner ces

dahlias, belles fleurs que j'exhcre." (Somber, sad, full of world-weariness.) For

obvious reasons, I preferred myhouse to his for the games of chess we had two or

three times weekly. He looked like some old battered idol as he sat with his pudgy

hands in his lap and stared at the board as if it were a corpse. Wheezing he would

mediate for ten minutes--then make a losing move. Or the good man, after even

more thought, might utter: Au roi! With a slow old-dog woof that had a gargling

sound at the back of it which made his jowls wabble; and then he would lift his

circumflex eyebrows with a deep sigh as I pointed out to him that he was in check

himself. Sometimes, from where we sat in my cold study I could hear Lo's bare feet

practicing dance techniques in the living room downstairs; but Gaston's outgoing

senses were comfortably dulled, and he remained unaware of those naked rhythms--

and-one, and-two, and-one, and-two, weight transferred on a straight right leg, leg

up and out to the side, and-one, and-two, and only when she started jumping,

opening her legs at the height of the jump, and flexing one leg, and extending the

other, and flying, and landing on her toes--only then did my pale, pompous, morose

opponent rub his head or cheek a if confusing those distant thuds with the awful

stabs of my formidable Queen. Sometimes Lola would slouch in while we pondered

the board--and it was every time a treat to see Gaston, his elephant eye still fixed on

his pieces, ceremoniously rise to shake hands with her, and forthwith release her

limp fingers, and without looking once at her, descend again into his chair to topple

into the trap I had laid for him. One day around Christmas, after I had not seen him

for a fortnight or so, he asked me "Et toutes vos fillettes, elles vont bien?" from

which it became evident to me that he had multiplied my unique Lolita by the

number of sartorial categories his downcast moody eye had glimpsed during a whole

series of her appearances: blue jeans, a skirt, shorts, a quilted robe. I am loath to

dwell so long on the poor fellow (sadly enough, a year later, during a voyage to

Europe, from which he did not return, he got involved in a sale histoire, in Napes of

all places!). I would have hardly alluded to him at all had not his Beardsley existence

had such a queer bearing on my case. I need him for my defense. There he was

devoid of any talent whatsoever, a mediocre teacher, a worthless scholar, a glum

repulsive fat old invert, highly contemptuous of the American way of life,

triumphantly ignorant of the English language--there he was in priggish New

England, crooned over by the old and caressed by the young--oh, having a grand

time and fooling everybody; and here was I.



7

I am now faced with the distasteful task of recording a definite drop in Lolita's

morals. If her share in the ardors she kindled had never amounted to much, neither

had pure lucre ever come to the fore. But I was weak, I was not wise, my school-girl

nymphet had me in thrall. With the human element dwindling, the passion, the

tenderness, and the torture only increased; and of this she took advantage. Her

weekly allowance, paid to her under condition she fulfill her basic obligations, was

twenty-one cents at the start of the Beardsley era--and went up to one dollar five

before its end. This was a more than generous arrangement seeing she constantly

received from me all kinds of small presents and had for the asking any sweetmeat

or movie under the moon--although, of course, I might fondly demand an additional

kiss, or even a whole collection of assorted caresses, when I knew she coveted very

badly some item of juvenile amusement. She was, however, not easy to deal with.

Only very listlessly did she earn her three pennies--or three nickels--per day; and

she proved to be a cruel negotiator whenever it was in her power to deny me certain

life-wrecking, strange, slow paradisal philters without which I could not live more

than a few days in a row, and which, because of the very nature of love's languor, I

could not obtain by force. Knowing the magic and might of her own soft mouth, she

managed--during one schoolyear!--to raise the bonus price of a fancy embrace to

three, and even four bucks! O Reader! Laugh not, as you imagine me, on the very

rack of joy noisily emitting dimes and quarters, and great big silver dollars like some

sonorous, jingly and wholly demented machine vomiting riches; and in the margin of

that leaping epilepsy she would firmly clutch a handful of coins in her little fist,

which, anyway, I used to pry open afterwards unless she gave me the slip,

scrambling away to hide her loot. And just as every other day I would cruise all

around the school area and on comatose feet visit drugstores, and peer into foggy

lanes, and listen to receding girl laughter in between my heart throbs and the falling

leaves, so every now and then I would burgle her room and scrutinize torn papers in

the wastebasket with the painted roses, and look under the pillow of the virginal bed

I had just made myself. Once I found eight one-dollar notes in one of her books

(fittingly--Treasure Island), and once a hole in the wall behind Whistler's Mother

yielded as much as twenty-four dollars and some change--say twenty-four sixty--

which I quietly removed, upon which, next day, she accused, to my face, honest Mrs.

Holigan of being a filthy thief. Eventually, she lived up to her I.Q. by finding a safer

hoarding place which I never discovered; but by that time I had brought prices down

drastically by having her earn the hard and nauseous way permission to participate

in the school's theatrical program; because what I feared most was not that she

might ruin me, but that she might accumulate sufficient cash to run away. I believe

the poor fierce-eyed child had figured out that with a mere fifty dollars in her purse

she might somehow reach Broadway or Hollywood--or the foul kitchen of a diner

(Help Wanted) in a dismal ex-prairie state, with the wind blowing, and the stars

blinking, and the cars, and the bars, and the barmen, and everything soiled, torn,

dead.



8

I did my best, your Honor, to tackele the problem of boys. Oh, I used even to read in

the Beardsley Star a so-called Column for Teens, to find out how to behave! A word

to fathers. Don't frighten away daughter's friend. Maybe it is a bit hard for you to

realize that now the boys are finding her attractive. To you she is still a little girl. To

the boys she's charming and fun, lovely and gay. They like her. Today you clinch big

deals in an executive's office, but yesterday you were just highschool Jim carrying

Jane's school books. Remember? Don't you want your daughter, now that her turn

has come, to be happy in the admiration and company of boys she likes? Don't you

want your daughter, now that her turn has come, to be happy in the admiration and

company of boys she likes? Don't you want them to have wholesome fun together?

Wholesome fun? Good Lord! Why not treat the young fellows as guests in your

house? Why not make conversation with them? Draw them out, make them laugh

and feel at ease? Welcome, fellow, to this bordello. If she breaks the rules don't

explode out loud in front of her partner in crime. Let her take the brunt of your

displeasure in private. And stop making the boys feel she's the daughter of an old

ogre. First of all the old ogre drew up a list under "absolutely forbidden" and another

under "reluctantly allowed." Absolutely forbidden were dates, single or double or

triple--the next step being of course mass orgy. She might visit a candy bar with her

girl friends, and there giggle-chat with occasional young males, while I waited in the

car at a discreet distance; and I promised her that if her group were invited by a

socially acceptable group in Butler's Academy for Bo[ys for their annual ball (heavily

chaperoned, of course), I might consider the question whether a girl of fourteen can

don her first "formal" (a kind of gown that makes thin-armed teen-agers look like

flamingoes). Moreover, I promised her to throw a party a t our house to which she

would be allowed to invite her prettier girl friends and the nicer boys she would have

met by that time at the Butler dance. But I was quite positive that as long as my

regime lasted she would never, never be permitted to go with a youngster in rut to a

movie, or neck in a car, or go to boy-girl parties at the houses of schoolmates, or

indulge out of my earshot in boy-girl telephone conversations, even if "only

discussing his relations with a friend of mine." Lo was enraged by all this--called me

a lousy crook and worse--and I would probably have lost my temper had I not soon

discovered, to my sweetest relief, that what really angered her was my depriving her

not of a specific satisfaction but of a general right. I was impinging, you see, on the

conventional program, the stock pastimes, the "things that are done," the routine of

youth; for there is nothing more conservative than a child, especially a girl-child, be

she the most auburn and russet, the most mythopoeic nymphet in October's

orchard-haze. Do not misunderstand me. I cannot be absolutely certain that in the

course of the winter she did not manage to have, in a casual way, improper contacts

with unknown young fellows; of course, no matter how closely I controlled her

leisure, there would constantly occur unaccounted-for time leaks with over-elaborate

explanations to stop them up in retrospect; of course, my jealousy would constantly

catch its jagged claw in the fine fabrics of nymphet falsity; but I did definitely feel--

and can now vouchsafe for the accuracy of my feeling--that there was no reason for

serious alarm. I felt that way not because I never once discovered any palpable hard

young throat to crush among the masculine mutes that flickered somewhere in the

background; but because it was to me "overwhelmingly obvious" (a favorite

expression with my aunt Sybil) that all varieties of high school boys--from the

perspiring nincompoop whom "holding hands" thrills, to the self-sufficient rapist with

pustules and a souped-up car--equally bored my sophisticated young mistress. "All

this noise about boys gags me," she had scrawled on the inside of a schoolbook, and

underneath, in Mona's hand (Mona is due any minute now), there was the sly quip:

"What about Rigger?" (due too). Faceless, then, are the chappies I happened to see

in her company. There was for instance Red Sweater who one day, the day we had

the first snow--saw her home; from the parlor window I observed them talking near

our porch. She wre her first cloth coat with a fur collar; there was a small brown cap

on my favorite hairdo--the fringe in front and the swirl at the sides and the natural

curls at the back--and her damp-dark moccasins and white socks were more sloppy

than ever. She pressed as usual her books to her chest while speaking or listening,

and her feet gestured all the time: she would stand on her left instep with her right

toe, remove it backward, cross her feet, rock slightly, sketch a few steps, and then

start the series all over again. There was Windbreaker who talked to her in front of a

restaurant one Sunday afternoon while his mother and sister attempted to walk me

away for a chat; I dragged along and looked back at my only love. She had

developed more than one conventional mannerism, such as the polite adolescent

way of showing one is literally "doubled up" with laughter by inclining one's head,

and so (as she sensed my call), still feigning helpless merriment, she walked

backward a couple of steps, and then faced about, and walked toward me with a

fading smile. On the other hand, I greatly liked--perhaps because it reminded me of

her first unforgettable confession--her trick of sighing "oh dear!" in humorous wistful

submission to fate, or emitting a long "no-o" in a deep almost growling undertone

when the blow of fate had actually fallen. Above all--since we are speaking of

movement and youth--I liked to see her spinning up and down Thayer Street on her

beautiful young bicycle: rising on the pedals to work on them lustily, then sinking

back in a languid posture while the speed wore itself off; and then she would stop at

our mailbox and, still astride, would flip through a magazine she found there, and

put it back, and press her tongue to one side of her upper lip and push off with her

foot, and again sprint through pale shade and sun. On the whole she seemed to me

better adapted to her surroundings than I had hoped she would be when considering

my spoiled slave-child and the bangles of demeanor she naovely affected the winter

before in california. Although I could never get used to the constant state of anxiety

in which the guilty, the great, the tenderhearted live, I felt I was doing my best in

the way of mimicry. As I lay on my narrow studio bed after a session of adoration

and despair in Lolita's cold bedroom, I used to review the concluded day by checking

my own image as it prowled rather than passed before the mind's red eye. I watched

dark-and-handsome, not un-Celtic, probably high-church, possibly very high-church,

Dr. Humbert see his daughter off to school I watched him greet with his slow smile

and pleasantly arched thick black ad-eyebrows good Mrs. Holigan, who smelled of

the plague (and would head, I knew, for master's gin at the first opportunity). With

Mr. West, retired executioner or writer of religious tracts--who cared?--I saw

neighbor what's his name, I think they are French or Swiss, meditate in his frank-

windowed study over a typewriter, rather gaunt-profiled, an almost Hitlerian cowlick

on his pale brow. Weekends, wearing a well-tailored overcoat and brown gloves,

Professor H. might be seen with his daughter strolling to Walton Inn (famous for its

violet-ribboned china bunnies and chocolate boxes among which you sit and wait for

a "table for two" still filthy with your predecessor's crumbs). Seen on weekdays,

around one p.m. , saluting with dignity Argus-eyed East while maneuvering the car

out of the garage and around the damned evergreens, and down onto the slippery

road. Raising a cold eye from book to clock in the positively sultry Beardsley College

library, among bulky young women caught and petrified in the overflow of human

knowledge. Walking across the campus with the college clergyman, the Rev. Rigger

(who also taught Bible in Beardsley School). "Somebody told me her mother was a

celebrated actress killed in an airplane accident. Oh? My mistake, I presume. Is that

so? I see. How sad." (Sublimating her mother, eh?) Slowly pushing my little pram

through the labyrinth of the supermarket, in the wake of Professor W., also a slow-

moving and gentle widower with the eyes of a goat. Shoveling the snow in my shirt-

sleeves, a voluminous black and white muffler around my neck. Following with no

show of rapacious haste (even taking time to wipe my feet on the mat) my school-

girl daughter into the house. Taking Dolly to the dentist--pretty nurse beaming at

her--old magazines--ne montrez pas vos zhambes. At dinner with Dolly in town, Mr.

Edgar H. Humbert was seen eating his steak in the continental knife-and-fork

manner. Enjoying, in duplicate, a concert: two marble-faced, becalmed Frenchmen

sitting side by side, with Monsieur H. H.'s musical little girl on her father's right, and

the musical little boy of Professor W. (father spending a hygienic evening in

Providence) on Monsieur G. G.'s left. Opening the garage, a square of light that

engulfs the car and is extinguished. Brightly pajamaed, jerking down the window

shade in Dolly's bedroom. Saturday morning, unseen, solemnly weighing the winter-

bleached lassie in the bathroom. Seen and heard Sunday morning, no churchgoer

after all, saying don't be too late, to Dolly who is bound for the covered court.

Letting in a queerly observant schoolmate of Dolly's: "First time I've seen a man

wearing a smoking jacket, sir--except in movies, of course."



9

Her girlfriends, whom I looked forward to meet, proved on the whole disappointing.

There was Opal Something, and Linda Hall, and Avis Chapman, and Eva Rosen, and

Mona Dahl (save one, all these names are approximations, of course). Opal was a

bashful, formless, bespectacled, bepimpled creature who doted on Dolly who bullied

her. With Linda Hall the school tennis champion, Dolly played singles at least twice a

week: I suspect Linda was a true nymphet, but for some unknown reason she did

not come--was perhaps not allowed to come--to our house; so I recall her only as a

flash of natural sunshine on an indoor court. Of the rest, none had any claims to

nymphetry except Eva Rosen. Avis ws a plump lateral child with hairy legs, while

Mona, though handsome in a coarse sensual way and only a year older than my

aging mistress, had obviously long ceased to be a nymphet, if she ever had been

one. Eva Rosen, a displaced little person from France, was on the other hand a good

example of a not strikingly beautiful child revealing to the perspicacious amateur

some of the basic elements of nymphet charm, such as a perfect pubescent figure

and lingering eyes and high cheekbones. Her glossy copper hair had Lolita's

silkiness, and the features of her delicate milky-white face with pink lips and

silverfish eyelashes were less foxy than those of her likes--the great clan of intra-

racial redheads; nor did she sport their green uniform but wore, as I remember her,

a lot of black or cherry dark--a very smart black pullover, for instance, and high-

heeled black shoes, and garnet-red fingernail polish. I spoke French to her (much to

Lo's disgust). The child's tonalities were still admirably pure, but for school words

and play words she resorted to current American and then a slight Brooklyn accent

would crop up in her speech, which was amusing in a little Parisian who went to a

select New England school with phoney British aspirations. Unfortunately, despite

"that French kid's uncle" being "a millionaire," Lo dropped Eva for some reason

before I had had time to enjoy in my modest way her fragrant presence in the

Humbert open house. The reader knows what importance I attached to having a

bevy of page girls, consolation prize nymphets, around my Lolita. For a while, I

endeavored to interest my senses in Mona Dahl who was a good deal around,

especially during the spring term when Lo and she got so enthusiastic about

dramatics. I have often wondered what secrets outrageously treacherous Dolores

Haze had imparted to Mona while blurting out to me by urgent and well-paid request

various really incredible details concerning an affair that Mona had had with a marine

at the seaside. It was characteristic of Lo that she chose for her closest chum that

elegant, cold, lascivious, experienced young female whom I once heard (misheard,

Lo swore) cheerfully say in the hallway to Lo--who had remarked that her (Lo's)

sweater was of virgin wool: "The only thing about you that is, kiddo . . ." She had a

curiously husky voice, artificially waved dull dark hair, earrings, amber-brown

prominent eyes and luscious lips. Lo said teachers had remonstrated with her on her

loading herself with so much costume jewelry. Her hands trembled. She was

burdened with a 150 I.Q. And I also knew she had a tremendous chocolate-brown

mole on he womanish back which I inspected the night Lo and she had worn low-cut

pastel-colored, vaporous dresses for a dance at the Butler Academy. I am

anticipating a little, but I cannot help running my memory all over the keyboard of

that school year. In the meeting my attempts to find out what kind of boys Lo knew,

Miss Dahl was elegantly evasive. Lo who had gone to play tennis at Linda's country

club had telephoned she might be a full half hour late, and so, would I entertain

Mona who was coming to practice with her a scene from The Taming of the Shrew.

Using all the modulations, all the allure of manner and voice she was capable of and

staring at me with perhaps--could I be mistaken?--a faint gleam of crystalline irony,

beautiful Mona replied: "Well, sir, the fact is Dolly is not much concerned with mere

boys. Fact is, we are rivals. She and I have a crush on the Reverend Rigger." (This

was a joke--I have already mentioned that gloomy giant of a man, with the jaw of a

horse: he was to bore me to near murder with his impressions of Switzerland at a

tea party for parents that I am unable to place correctly in terms of time.) How had

the ball been? Oh, it had been a riot. A what? A panic. Terrific, in a word. Had Lo

danced a lot? Oh, not a frightful lot, just as much as she could stand. What did she,

languorous Mona, think of Lo? Sir? Did she think Lo was doing well at school? Gosh,

she certainly was quite a kid. But her general behavior was--? Oh, she was a swell

kid. But still? "Oh, she's a doll," concluded Mona, and sighed abruptly, and picked up

a book that happened to lie at hand, and with a change of expression, falsely

furrowing her brow, inquired: "Do tell me about Ball Zack, sir. Is he really that

good?" She moved up so close to my chair that I made out through lotions and

creams her uninteresting skin scent. A sudden odd thought stabbed me: was my Lo

playing the pimp? If so, she had found the wrong substitute. Avoiding Mona'' cool

gaze, I talked literature for a minute. Then Dolly arrived--and slit her pale eyes at

us. I left the two friends to their own devices. One of the latticed squares in a small

cobwebby casement window at the turn of the staircase was glazed with ruby, and

that raw wound among the unstained rectangles and its asymmetrical position--a

night's move from the top--always strangely disturbed me.



10

Sometimes . . . Come on, how often exactly, Bert? Can you recall four, five, more

such occasions? Or would no human heart have survived two or three? Sometimes (I

have nothing to say in reply to your question), while Lolita would be haphazardly

preparing her homework, sucking a pencil, lolling sideways in an easy chair with both

legs over its arm, I would shed all my pedagogic restraint, dismiss all our quarrels,

forget all my masculine pride--and literally crawl on my knees to your chair, my

Lolita! You would give me one look--a gray furry question mark of a look: "Oh no,

not again" (incredulity, exasperation); for you never deigned to believe that I could,

without any specific designs, ever crave to bury my face in your plaid skirt, my

darling! The fragility of those bare arms of yours--how I longed to enfold them, all

your four limpid lovely limbs, a folded colt, and take your head between my

unworthy hands, and pull the temple-skin back on both sides, and kiss your chinesed

eyes, and--"Pulease, leave me alone, will you," you would say, "for Christ's sake

leave me alone." And I would get up from the floor while you looked on, your face

deliberately twitching in imitation of my tic nerveux. But never mind, never mind, I

am only a brute, never mind, let us go on with my miserable story.



11

One Monday forenoon, in December I think, Pratt asked me to come over for a talk.

Dolly's last report had been poor, I knew. But instead of contenting myself with some

such plausible explanation of this summons, I imagined all sort of horrors, and had

to fortify myself with a pint of my "pin" before I could face the interview. Slowly, all

Adam's apple and heart, I went up the steps of the scaffold. A huge woman, gray-

haired, drowsy, with a broad flat nose and small eyes behind black-rimmed glasses--

"Sit down," she said, pointing to an informal and humiliating hassock, while she

perched with ponderous spryness on the arm of an oak chair. For a moment or two,

she peered at me with smiling curiosity. She had done it at our first meeting, I

recalled, but I could afford then to scowl back. Her eye left me. She lapsed into

thought--probably assumed. Making up her mind she rubbed, fold on fold, her dark

gray flannel skirt at the knee, dispelling a trace of chalk or something. Then she said,

still rubbing, not looking up: "Let me ask a blunt question, Mr. Haze. You are an old-

fashioned Continental father, aren't you?" "Why, no," I said, "conservative, perhaps,

but not what you would call old-fashioned." She sighed, frowned, then clapped her

big plump hands together in a let's-get-down-to-business manner, and again fixed

her beady eyes upon me. "Dolly Haze," she said, "is a lovely child, but the onset of

sexual maturing seems to give her trouble." I bowed slightly. What else could I do?

"She is still shuttling," said Miss Pratt, showing how with her liver-spotted hands,

"between the anal and genital zones of development. Basically she is a lovely--" "I

beg your pardon," I said, "what zones?" "That's the old-fashioned European in you!"

cried Pratt delivering a slight tap on my wrist watch and suddenly disclosing her

dentures. "All I mean is that biologic drives--do you smoke?--are not fused in Dolly,

do not fall so to speak into a--into a rounded pattern." Her hands held for a moment

an invisible melon. "She is attractive, bright though careless" (breathing heavily,

without leaving her perch, the woman took time out to look at the lovely child's

report sheet on the desk at her right). "Her marks are getting worse and worse. Now

I wonder, Mr. Haze--" Again the false meditation. "Well," she went on with zest, "as

for me, I do smoke, and, as dear Dr. Pierce used to say: I'm not proud of it but I

jeest love it." She lit up and the smoke she exhaled from her nostrils was like a pair

of tusks. "Let me give you a few details, it won't take a moment. Now here let me

see [rummaging among her papers]. She is defiant toward Miss Redcock and

impossibly rude to Miss Cormorant. Now here is one of our special research reports:

Enjoys singing with group in class though mind seems to wander. Crosses her knees

and wags left leg to rhythm. Type of by-words: a two-hundred-forty-two word area

of the commonest pubescent slang fenced in by a number of obviously European

polysyllabics. Sighs a good deal in class. Let me see. Yes. Now comes the last week

in November. Sighs a good deal in class. Chews gum vehemently. Does not bite her

nails though if she did, this would conform better to her general pattern--

scientifically speaking, of course. Menstruation, according to the subject, well

established. Belongs at present to no church organization. By the way, Mr. Haze, her

mother was--? Oh, I see. And you are--? Nobody's business is, I suppose, God's

business. Something else we wanted to know. She was no regular home duties, I

understand. Making a princess of your Dolly, Mr. Haze, he? Well, what else have we

got here? Handles books gracefully. Voice pleasant. Giggles rather often. A little

dreamy. Has private jokes of her own, transposing for instance the first letters of

some of her teachers names. Hair light and dark brown, lustrous--well [laughing]

you are aware of that, I suppose. Nose unobstructed, feet high-arched, eyes-let me

see, I had here somewhere a still more recent report. Aha, here we are. Miss Gold

says Dolly's tennis form is excellent to superb, even better than Linda Hall's, but

concentration and point-accumulation are just "poor to fair." Miss Cormorant cannot

decide whether Dolly has exceptional emotional control or none at all. Miss Horn

reports she--I mean, Dolly--cannot verbalize her emotions, while according to Miss

Cole Dolly's metabolic efficiency is superfine. Miss Molar thinks Dolly is myopic and

should see a good ophthalmologist, but Miss Redcock insists that the girl simulates

eye-strain to get away with scholastic incompetence. And to conclude, Mr. Haze, our

researchers are wondering about something really crucial. Now I want to ask you

something. I want to know if your poor wife, or yourself, or anyone else in the

family--I understand she has several aunts and a maternal grandfather in

California?--oh, had!--I'm sorry--well, we all wonder if anybody in the family has

instructed Dolly in the process of mammalian reproduction. The general impression is

that fifteen-year-old Dolly remains morbidly uninterested in sexual matters, or to be

exact, represses her curiosity in order to save her ignorance and self-dignity. All

right-fourteen. You see, Mr. Haze, Beardsley School does not believe in bees and

blossoms, and storks and love birds, but it does believe very strongly in preparing its

students for mutually satisfactory mating and successful child rearing. We feel Dolly

could make excellent progress if only she would put her mind to her work. Miss

Cormorant's report is significant in that respect. Dolly is inclined to be, mildly

speaking impudent. But all feel that primo, you should have your family doctor tell

her the facts of life and, secundo, that you allow her to enjoy the company of her

schoolmates' brothers at the Junior Club or in Dr. Rigger's organization, or in the

lovely homes of our parents." "She may meet boys at her own lovely home," I said.

"I hope she will," said Pratt buoyantly. "When we questioned her about her troubles,

Dolly refused to discuss the home situation, but we have spoken to some of her

friends and really--well, for example, we insist you un-veto her nonparticiaption in

the dramatic group. You just must allow her to take part in The Hunted Enchanters.

She was such a perfect little nymph in the try-out, and sometime in spring the

author will stay for a few days at Beardsley College and may attend a rehearsal or

two in our new auditorium. I mean it is all part of the fun of being young and alive

and beautiful. You must understand--" "I always thought of myself," I said, "as a

very understanding father." "Oh, no doubt, no doubt, but Miss Cormorant thinks, and

I am inclined to agree with her, that Dolly is obsessed by sexual thoughts for which

she finds no outlet, and will tease and martyrize other girls, or even our younger

instructors because they do have innocent dates with boys." Shrugged my shoulders.

A shabby imigri. "Let us put our two heads together, Mr. Haze. What on earth is

wrong with that child?" "She seems quite normal and happy to me," I said (disaster

coming at last? Was I found out? Had they got some hypnotist?). "What worries me,"

said Miss Pratt looking at her watch and starting to go over the whole subject again,

"is that both teachers and schoolmates find Dolly antagonistic, dissatisfied, cagey--

and everybody wonders why you are so firmly opposed to all the natural recreations

of a normal child." "Do you mean sex play?" I asked jauntily, in despair, a cornered

old rat. "Well, I certainly welcome this civilized terminology," said Pratt with a grin.

"But this is not quite the point. Under the auspices of Beardsley School, dramatics,

dances and other natural activities are not technically sex play, though girls do meet

boys, if that is what you object to." "All right," I said, my hassock exhaling a weary

sign. "You win. She can take part in that play. Provided male parts are taken by

female parts." "I am always fascinated," said Pratt, "by the admirable way

foreigners--or at least naturalized Americans--use our rich language. I'm sure Miss

Gold, who conducts the play group, will be overjoyed. I notice she is one of the few

teachers that seem to like--I mean who seem to find Dolly manageable. This takes

care of general topics, I guess; now comes a special matter. We are in trouble

again." Pratt paused truculently, then rubbed her index finger under her nostrils with

such vigor that her nose performed a kind of war dance. "I'm a frank person," she

said, "but conventions are conventions, and I find it difficult . . . Let me put it this

way . . . The Walkers, who live in what we call around here the Duke's Manor, you

know the great gray house on the hill--they send their two girls to our school, and

we have the niece of President Moore with us, a really gracious child, not to speak of

a number of other prominent children. Well, under the circumstances, it is rather a

jolt when Dolly, who looks like a little lady, uses words which you as a foreigner

probably simply do not know or do not understand. Perhaps it might be better--

Would you like me to have Dolly come up here right away to discuss things? No? You

see--oh well, let's have it out. Dolly has written a most obscene four-letter word

which our Dr. Cutler tells me is low-Mexican for urinal with her lipstick on some

health pamphlets which Miss Redcock, who is getting married in June, distributed

among the girls, and we thought she should stay after hours--another half hour at

least. But if you like--" "No," I said, "I don't want to interfere with rules. I shall talk

to her later. I shall thrash it out." "Do," said the woman rising from her chair arm.

"And perhaps we can get together again soon, and if things do not improve we might

have Dr. Cutler analyze her." Should I marry Pratt and strangle her? ". . .And

perhaps your family doctor might like to examine her physically--just a routine

check-up. She is in Mushroom--the last classroom along that passage." Beardsley

School, it may be explained, copied a famous girls school in England by having

"traditional" nicknames for its various classrooms: Mushroom, Room-In 8, B-Room,

Room-BA and so on. Mushroom was smelly, with a sepia print of Reynolds' "Age of

Innocence" above the chalkboard, and several rows of clumsy-looking pupil desks. At

one of these, my Lolita was reading the chapter on "Dialogue" in Baker's Dramatic

Technique, and all was very quiet, and there was another girl with a very naked,

porcelain-white neck and wonderful platinum hair, who sat in front reading too,

absolutely lost to the world and interminably winding a soft curl around one finger,

and I sat beside Dolly just behind that neck and that hair, and unbuttoned my

overcoat and for sixty-five cents plus the permission to participate in the school play,

had Dolly put her inky, chalky, red-knuckled hand under the desk. Oh, stupid and

reckless of me, no doubt, but after the torture I had been subjected to, I simply had

to take advantage of a combination that I knew would never occur again.



12

Around Christmas she caught a bad chill and was examined by a friend of Miss

Lester, a Dr. Ilse Tristramson (hi, Ilse, you were a dear, uninquisitive soul, and you

touched my dove very gently). She diagnosed bronchitis, patted Lo on the back (all

its bloom erect because of the fever) and put her to bed for a week or longer. At first

she "ran a temperature" in American parlance, and I could not resist the exquisite

caloricity of unexpected delights--Venus febriculosa--though it was a very languid

Lolita that moaned and coughed and shivered in my embrace. And as soon as she

was well again, I threw a Party with Boys. Perhaps I had drunk a little too much in

preparation for the ordeal. Perhaps I made a fool of myself. The girls had decorated

and plugged in a small fir tree--German custom, except that colored bulbs had

superseded wax candles. Records were chosen and fed into my landlord's

phonograph. Chic Dolly wore a nice gray dress with fitted bodice and flared skirt.

Humming, I retired to my study upstairs--and then every ten or twenty minutes I

would come down like an idiot just for a few seconds; to pick up ostensibly my pipe

from the mantelpiece or hunt for the newspaper; and with every new visit these

simple actions became harder to perform, and I was reminded of the dreadfully

distant days when I used to brace myself to casually enter a room in the Ramsdale

house where Little Carmen was on. The party was not a success. Of the three girls

invited, one did not come at all, and one of the boys brought his cousin Roy, so there

was a superfluity of two boys, and the cousins knew all the steps, and the other

fellows could hardly dance at all, and most of the evening was spent in messing up

the kitchen, and then endlessly jabbering about what card game to play, and

sometime later, two girls and four boys sat on the floor of the living room, with all

windows open, and played a word game which Opal could not be made to

understand, while Mona and Roy, a lean handsome lad, drank ginger ale in the

kitchen, sitting on the table and dangling their legs, and hotly discussing

Predestination and the Law of Averages. After they had all gone my Lo said ugh,

closed her eyes, and dropped into a chair with all four limbs starfished to express the

utmost disgust and exhaustion and swore it was the most revolting bunch of boys

she had ever seen. I bought her a new tennis racket for that remark. January was

humid and warm, and February fooled the forsythia: none of the townspeople had

ever seen such weather. Other presents came tumbling in. For her birthday I bought

her a bicycle, the doe-like and altogether charming machine already mentioned--and

added to this a History of Modern American Painting: her bicycle manner, I mean her

approach to it, the hip movement in mounting, the grace and so on, afforded me

supreme pleasure; but my attempt to refine her pictorial taste was a failure; she

wanted to know if the guy noon-napping on Doris Lee's hay was the father of the

pseudo-voluptuous hoyden in the foreground, and could not understand why I said

Grant Wood or Peter Hurd was good, and Reginald Marsh or Frederick Waugh awful.



13

By the time spring had touched up Thayer Street with yellow and green and pink,

Lolita was irrevocably stage-struck. Pratt, whom I chanced to notice one Sunday

lunching with some people at Walton Inn, caught my eye from afar and went through

the motion of sympathetically and discreetly clapping her hands while Lo was not

looking. I detest the theatre as being a primitive and putrid form, historically

speaking; a form that smacks of stone-age rites and communal nonsense despite

those individual injections of genius, such as, say, Elizabethan poetry which a

closeted reader automatically pumps out of the stuff. Being much occupied at the

time with my own literary labors, I did not bother to read the complete text of The

Enchanted Hunters, the playlet in which Dolores Haze was assigned the part of a

farmer's daughter who imagines herself to be a woodland witch, or Diana, or

something, and who, having got hold of a book on hypnotism, plunges a number of

lost hunters into various entertaining trances before falling in her turn under the

spell of a vagabond poet (Mona Dahl). That much I gleaned from bits of crumpled

and poorly typed script that Lo sowed all over the house. The coincidence of the title

with the name of an unforgettable inn was pleasant in a sad little way: I wearily

thought I had better not bring it to my own enchantress's notice, lest a brazen

accusation of mawkishness hurt me even more than her failure to notice it for herself

had done. I assumed the playlet was just another, practically anonymous, version of

some banal legend. Nothing prevented one, of course, from supposing that in quest

of an attractive name the founder of the hotel had been immediately and solely

influenced by the chance fantasy of the second-rate muralist he had hired, and that

subsequently the hotel's name had suggested the play's title. But in my credulous,

simple, benevolent mind I happened to twist it the other way round, and without

giving the whole matter much though really, supposed that mural, name and title

had all been derived from a common source, from some local tradition, which I, an

alien unversed in New England lore, would not be supposed to know. In consequence

I was under the impression (all this quite casually, you understand, quite outside my

orbit of importance) that the accursed playlet belonged to the type of whimsy for

juvenile consumption, arranged and rearranged many times, such as Hansel and

Gretel by Richard Roe, or The Sleeping Beauty by Dorothy Doe, or The Emperor's

New Clothes by Maurice Vermont and Marion Rumpelmeyer--all this to be found in

any Plays for School Actors or Let's Have a Play! In other words, I did not know--and

would not have cared, if I did --that actually The Enchanted Hunters was a quite

recent and technically original composition which had been produced for the first

time only three or four months ago by a highbrow group in New York. To me--

inasmuch as I could judge from my charmer's part--it seemed to be a pretty dismal

kind of fancy work, with echoes from Lenormand and Maeterlinck and various quiet

British dreamers. The red-capped, uniformly attired hunters, of which one was a

banker, another a plumber, a third a policeman, a fourth an undertaker, a fifth an

underwriter, a sixth an escaped convict (you see the possibilities!), went through a

complete change of mind in Dolly's Dell, and remembered their real lives only as

dreams or nightmares from which little Diana had aroused them; but a seventh

Hunter (in a green cap, the fool) was a Young Poet, and he insisted, much to Diana's

annoyance, that she and the entertainment provided (dancing nymphs, and elves,

and monsters) were his, the Poet's, invention. I understand that finally, in utter

disgust at his cocksureness, barefooted Dolores was to lead check-trousered Mona to

the paternal farm behind the Perilous Forest to prove to the braggart she was not a

poet's fancy, but a rustic, down-to-brown-earth lass--and a last-minute kiss was to

enforce the play's profound message, namely, that mirage and reality merge in love.

I considered it wiser not to criticize the thing in front of Lo: she was so healthily

engrossed in "problems of expression," and so charmingly did she put her narrow

Florentine hands together, batting her eyelashes and pleading with me not to come

to rehearsals as some ridiculous parents did because she wanted to dazzle me with a

perfect First Night--and because I was, anyway, always butting in and saying the

wrong thing, and cramping her style in the presence of other people. There was one

very special rehearsal . . . my heart, my heart . . . there was one day in May marked

by a lot of gay flurry--it all rolled past, beyond my ken, immune to my memory, and

when I saw Lo next, in the late afternoon, balancing on her bike, pressing the palm

of her hand to the damp bark of a young birch tree on the edge of our lawn, I was so

struck by the radiant tenderness of her smile that for an instant I believed all our

troubles gone. "Can you remember," she said, "what was the name of that hotel, you

know [nose pucketed], come on, you know--with those white columns and the

marble swan in the lobby? Oh, you know [noisy exhalation of breath]--the hotel

where you raped me. Okay, skip it. I mean, was it [almost in a whisper] The

Enchanted Hunters? Oh, it was? [musingly] Was it?"--and with a yelp of amorous

vernal laughter she slapped the glossy bole and tore uphill, to the end of the street,

and then rode back, feet at rest on stopped pedals, posture relaxed, one hand

dreaming in her print-flowered lap.



14

Because it supposedly tied up with her interest in dance and dramatics, I had

permitted Lo to take piano lessons with a Miss Emperor (as we French scholars may

conveniently call her) to whose blue-shuttered little white house a mile or so beyond

Beardsley Lo would spin off twice a week. One Friday night toward the end of May

(and a week or so after the very special rehearsal Lo had not had me attend) the

telephone in my study, where I was in the act of mopping up Gustave's--I mean

Gaston's--king's side, rang and Miss Emperor asked if Lo was coming next Tuesday

because she had missed last Tuesday's and today's lessons. I said she would by all

means--and went on with the game. As the reader may well imagine, my faculties

were now impaired, and a move or two later, with Gaston to play, I noticed through

the film of my general distress that he could collect my queen; he noticed it too, but

thinking it might be a trap on the part of his tricky opponent, he demurred for quite

a minute, and puffed and wheezed, and shook his jowls, and even shot furtive

glances at me, and made hesitating half-thrusts with his pudgily bunched fingers--

dying to take that juicy queen and not daring--and all of a sudden he swooped down

upon it (who knows if it did not teach him certain later audacities?), and I spent a

dreary hour in achieving a draw. He finished his brandy and presently lumbered

away, quite satisfied with this result (mon pauvre ami, je ne vous ai jamais revu et

quoiqu'il y ait bien peu de chance que vous voyiez mon livre, permiettez-moi de vous

dire que je vous serre la main bien cordialement, et que toutes mes fillettes vous

saluent). I found Dolores Haze at the kitchen table, consuming a wedge of pie, with

her eyes fixed on her script. They rose to meet mine with a kind of celestial vapidity.

She remained singularly unruffled when confronted with my discovery, and said d'un

petit air faussement contrit that she knew she was a very wicked kid, but simply had

not been able to resist the enchantment, and had used up those music hours--O

Reader, My Reader!--in a nearby public park rehearsing the magic forest scene with

Mona. I said "fine"--and stalked to the telephone. Mona's mother answered: "Oh yes,

she's in" and retreated with a mother's neutral laugh of polite pleasure to shout off

stage "Roy calling!" and the very next moment Mona rustled up, and forthwith, in a

low monotonous not untender voice started berating Roy for something he had said

or done and I interrupted her, and presently Mona was saying in her humbles,

sexiest contralto, "yes, sir," "surely, sir" "I am alone to blame, sir, in this unfortunate

business," (what elocution! what poise!) "honest, I feel very bad about it"--and so on

and so forth as those little harlots say. So downstairs I went clearing my throat and

holding my heart. Lo was now in the living room, in her favorite overstuffed chair. As

she sprawled there, biting at a hangnail an mocking me with her heartless vaporous

eyes, and all the time rocking a stool upon which she had placed the heel of an

outstretched shoeless foot, I perceived all at once with a sickening qualm how much

she had changed since I first met her two years ago. Or had this happened during

those last two weeks? Tendresse? Surely that was an exploded myth. She sat right in

the focus of my incandescent anger. The fog of all lust had been swept away leaving

nothing but this dreadful lucidity. Oh, she had changed! Her complexion was now

that of any vulgar untidy highschool girl who applies shared cosmetics with grubby

fingers to an unwashed face and does not mind what soiled texture, what pustulate

epidermis comes in contact with her skin. Its smooth tender bloom had been so

lovely in former days, so bright with tears, when I used to roll, in play, her tousled

head on my knee. A coarse flush had now replaced that innocent fluorescence. What

was locally known as a "rabbit cold" had painted with flaming pink the edges of her

contemptuous nostrils. As in terror I lowered my gaze, it mechanically slid along the

underside of her tensely stretched bare thigh--how polished and muscular her legs

had grown! She kept her wide-set eyes, clouded-glass gray and slightly bloodshot,

fixed upon me, and I saw the stealthy thought showing through them that perhaps

after all Mona was right, and she, orphan Lo, could expose me without getting

penalized herself. How wrong I was. How mad I was! Everything about her was of

the same exasperating impenetrable order--the strength of her shapely legs, the

dirty sole of her white sock, the thick sweater she wore despite the closeness of the

room, her wenchy smell, and especially the dead end of her face with its strange

flush and freshly made-up lips. Some of the red had left stains on her front teeth,

and I was struck by a ghastly recollection--the evoked image not of Monique, but of

another young prostitute in a bell-house, ages ago, who had been snapped up by

somebody else before I had time to decide whether her mere youth warranted my

risking some appalling disease, and who had just such flushed prominent pommettes

and a dead maman, and big front teeth, and a bit of dingy red ribbon in her country-

brown hair. "Well, speak," said Lo. "Was the corroboration satisfactory?" "Oh, yes," I

said. "Perfect. yes. And I do not doubt you two made it up. As a matter of fact, I do

not doubt you have told her everything about us." "Oh, yeah?" I controlled my

breath and said: "Dolores, this must stop right away. I am ready to yank you out of

Beardsley and lock you up you know where, but this must stop. I am ready to take

you away the time it takes to pack a suitcase. This must stop or else anything may

happen." "Anything may happen, huh?" I snatched away the stool she was rocking

with her heel and her foot fell with a thud on the floor. "Hey," she cried, "take it

easy." "First of all you go upstairs," I cried in my turn,--and simultaneously grabbed

at her and pulled her up. From that moment, I stopped restraining my voice, and we

continued yelling at each other, and she said, unprintable things. She said she

loathed me. She made monstrous faces at me, inflating her cheeks and producing a

diabolical plopping sound. She said I had attempted to violate her several times

when I was her mother's roomer. She said she was sure I had murdered her mother.

She said she would sleep with the very first fellow who asked her and I could do

nothing about it. I said she was to go upstairs and show me all her hiding places. It

was a strident and hateful scene. I held her by her knobby wrist and she kept turning

and twisting it this way and that, surreptitiously trying to find a weak point so as to

wrench herself free at a favorable moment, but I held her quite hard and in fact hurt

her rather badly for which I hope my heart may rot, and once or twice she jerked her

arm so violently that I feared her wrist might snap, and all the while she stared at

me with those unforgettable eyes where could anger and hot tears struggled, and

our voices were drowning the telephone, and when I grew aware of its ringing she

instantly escaped. With people in movies I seem to share the services of the machina

telephonica and its sudden god. This time it was an irate neighbor. The east window

happened to be agape in the living room, with the blind mercifully down, however;

and behind it the damp black night of a sour New England spring had been

breathlessly listening to us. I had always thought that type of haddocky spinster with

the obscene mind was the result of considerable literary inbreeding in modern

fiction; but now I am convinced that prude and prurient Miss East--or to explode her

incognito, Miss Fenton Lebone--had been probably protruding three-quarter-way

from her bedroom window as she strove to catch the gist of our quarrel. ". . . This

racket . . . lacks all sense of . . . " quacked the receiver, "we do not live in a

tenement here. I must emphatically . . . " I apologized for my daughter's friends

being so loud. Young people, you know--and cradled the next quack and a half.

Downstairs the screen door banged. Lo? Escaped? Through the casement on the

stairs I saw a small impetuous ghost slip through the shrubs; a silvery dot in the

dark--hub of the bicycle wheel--moved, shivered, and she was gone. It so happened

that the car was spending the night in a repair shop downtown. I had no other

alternative than to pursue on foot the winged fugitive. Even now, after more than

three years have heaved and elapsed, I cannot visualize that spring-night street,

that already so leafy street, without a gasp of panic. Before their lighted porch Miss

Lester was promenading Miss Favian's dropsical dackel. Mr. Hyde almost knocked it

over. Walk three steps and runt three. A tepid rain started to drum on the chestnut

leaves. At the next corner, pressing Lolita against an iron railing, a blurred youth

held and kissed--no, not her, mistake. My talons still tingling, I flew on. Half a mile

or so east of number fourteen, Thayer Street tangles with a private lane and a cross

street; the latter leads to the town proper; in front of the first drugstore, I saw--with

what melody of relief!--Lolita's fair bicycle waiting for her. I pushed instead of

pulling, pulled, pushed, pulled, and entered. Look out! some ten paces away Lolita,

though the glass of a telephone booth (membranous god still with us), cupping the

tube, confidentially hunched over it, slit her eyes at me, turned away with her

treasure, hurriedly hung up, and walked out with a flourish. "Tried to reach you at

home," she said brightly. "A great decision has been made. But first buy me a drink,

dad." She watched the listless pale fountain girl put in the ice, pour in the coke, add

the cherry syrup--and my heart was bursting with love-ache. That childish wrist. My

lovely child. You have a lovely child, Mr. Humbert. We always admire her as she

passes by. Mr. Pim watched Pippa suck in the concoction. J'ai toujours admiri

l'oeuvre du sublime dublinois. And in the meantime the rain had become a

voluptuous shower. "Look," she said as she rode the bike beside me, one foot

scraping the darkly glistening sidewalk, "look, I've decided something. I want to

leave school I hate that school I hate the play, I really do! Never go back. Find

another. Leave at once. Go for a long trip again. But this time we'll go wherever I

want, won't we?" I nodded. My Lolita. "I choose? C'est entendu?" she asked wobbling

a little beside me. Used French only when she was a very good little girl. "Okay.

Entendu. Now hop-hop-hop, Lenore, or you'll get soaked." (A storm of sobs was

filling my chest.) She bared her teeth and after her adorable school-girl fashioned,

leaned forward, and away she sped, my bird. Miss Lester's finely groomed hand held

a porch-door open for a waddling old dog qui prenait son temps. Lo was waiting for

me near the ghostly birch tree. "I am drenched," she declared at the top of her

voice. "Are you glad? To hell with the play! See what I mean?" An invisible hag's

claw slammed down an upper-floor window. In our hallway, ablaze with welcoming

lights, my Lolita peeled off her sweater, shook her gemmed hair, stretched towards

me two bare arms, raised one knee: "Carry me upstairs, please. I feel sort of

romantic tonight." It may interest physiologists to learn, at this point, that I have the

ability--a most singular case, I presume--of shedding torrents of tears throughout

the other tempest.



15

The brakes were relined, the waterpipes unclogged, the valves ground, and a

number of other repairs and improvements were paid for by not very mechanically-

minded but prudent papa Humbert, so that the late Mrs. Humbert's car was in

respectable shape when ready to undertake a new journey. We had promised

Beardsley School, good old Beardsley School, that we would be back as soon as my

Hollywood engagement came to an end (inventive Humbert was to be, I hinted, chief

consultant in the production of a film dealing with "existentialism," still a hot thing at

the time). Actually I was toying with the idea of gently trickling across the Mexican

border--I was braver now than last year--and there deciding what to do with my

little concubine who was now sixty inches tall and weighed ninety pounds. We had

dug out our tour books and maps. She had traced our route with immense zest. Was

it thanks to those theatricals that she had now outgrown her juvenile jaded airs and

was so adorably keen to explore rich reality? I experienced the queer lightness of

dreams that pale but warm Sunday morning when we abandoned Professor Chem's

puzzled house and sped along Main Street toward the four-lane highway. My Love's

striped, black-and-white cotton frock, jauntry blue with the large beautifully cut

aquamarine on a silver chainlet, which gemmed her throat: a spring rain gift from

me. We passed the New Hotel, and she laughed. "A penny for your thoughts," I said

and she stretched out her palm at once, but at that moment I had to apply the

breaks rather abruptly at a red light. As we pulled up, another car came to a gliding

stop alongside, and a very striking looking, athletically lean young woman (where

had I seen her?) with a high complexion and shoulder-length brilliant bronze hair,

greeted Lo with a ringing "Hi!"--and then, addressing me, effusively, edusively

(placed!), stressing certain words, said: "What a shame to was to tear Dolly away

from the play--you should have heard the author raving about her after that

rehearsal--" "Green light, you dope," said Lo under her breath, and simultaneously,

waving in bright adieu a bangled arm, Joan of Arc (in a performance we saw at the

local theatre) violently outdistanced us to swerve into Campus Avenue. "Who was it

exactly? Vermont or Rumpelmeyer?" "No--Edusa Gold--the gal who coaches us." "I

was not referring to her. Who exactly concocted that play?" "Oh! Yes, of course.

Some old woman, Clare Something, I guess. There was quite a crowd of them

there." "So she complimented you?" "Complimented my eye--she kissed me on my

pure brow"--and my darling emitted that new yelp of merriment which--perhaps in

connection with her theatrical mannerisms--she had lately begun to affect. "You are

a funny creature, Lolita," I said--or some such words. "Naturally, I am overjoyed you

gave up that absurd stage business. But what is curious is that you dropped the

whole thing only a week before its natural climax. Oh, Lolita, you should be careful of

those surrenders of yours. I remember you gave up Ramsdale for camp, and camp

for a joyride, and I could list other abrupt changes in your disposition. You must be

careful. There are things that should never be given up. You must persevere. You

should try to be a little nicer to me, Lolita. You should also watch your diet. The tour

of your thigh, you know, should not exceed seventeen and a half inches. More might

be fatal (I was kidding, of course). We are now setting out on a long happy journey.

I remember--"



16

I remember as a child in Europe gloating over a map of North America that had

"Appalachian Mountains" boldly running from Alabama up to New Brunswick, so that

the whole region they spanned--Tennessee, the Virginias, Pennsylvania, New York,

Vermont, New Hampshire and Maine, appeared to my imagination as a gigantic

Switzerland or even Tibet, all mountain, glorious diamond peak upon peak, giant

conifers, le montagnard imigri in his bear skin glory, and Felis tigris goldsmithi, and

Red Indians under the catalpas. That it all boiled down to a measly suburban lawn

and a smoking garbage incinerator, was appalling. Farewell, Appalachia! Leaving it,

we crossed Ohio, the three states beginning with "I," and Nebraska--ah, that first

whiff of the West! We traveled very leisurely, having more than a week to reach

Wace, Continental Divide, where she passionately desired to see he Ceremonial

Dances marking the seasonal opening of Magic Cave, and at least three weeks to

reach Elphinstone, gem of a western State where she yearned to climb Red Rock

from which a mature screen star had recently jumped to her death after a drunken

row with her gigolo. Again we were welcomed to wary motels by means of

inscriptions that read: "We wish you feel at home while here. All equipment was

carefully checked upon your arrival. Your license number is on record here. Use hot

water sparingly. We reserve the right to eject without notice any objectionable

person. Do not throw waste material of any kind in the toilet bowl. Thank you. Call

again. The Management. P.S. We consider our guests the Finest People of the

World." In these frightening places we paid ten for twins, flies queued outside at the

screenless door and successfully scrambled in, the ashes of our predecessors still

lingered in the ashtrays, a woman's hair lay on the pillow, one heard one's neighbor

hanging his coat in his closet, the hangers were ingeniously fixed to their bars by

coils of wire so as to thwart theft, and, in crowning insult, the pictures above the

twin beds were identical twins. I also noticed that commercial fashion was changing.

There was a tendency for cabins to fuse and gradually form the caravansary, and, lo

(she was not interested but the reader may be), a second story was added, and a

lobby grew in, and cars were removed to a communal garage, and the motel

reverted to the good old hotel. I now warn the reader not to mock me and my

mental daze. It is easy for him and me to decipher now a past destiny; but a destiny

in the making is, believe me, not one of those honest mystery stories where all you

have to do is keep an eye on the clues. In my youth I once read a French detective

tale where the clues were actually in italics; but that is not McFate's way--even if one

does learn to recognize certain obscure indications. For instance: I would not swear

that there was not at least one occasion, prior to, or at the very beginning of, the

Midwest lap of our journey, when she managed to convey some information to, or

otherwise get into contact with, a person or persons unknown. We had stopped at a

gas station, under the sign of Pegasus, and she had slipped out of her seat and

escaped to the rear of the premises while the raised hood, under which I had bent to

watch the mechanic's manipulations, hid her for a moment from my sight. Being

inclined to be lenient, I only shook my benign head though strictly speaking such

visits were taboo, since I felt instinctively that toilets--as also telephones--happened

to be, for reasons unfathomable, the points where my destiny was liable to catch.

We all have such fateful objects--it may be a recurrent landscape in one case, a

number in another--carefully chosen by the gods to attract events of special

significance for us: here shall John always stumble; there shall Jane's heart always

break. Well--my car had been attended to, and I had moved it away from the pumps

to let a pickup truck be serviced--when the growing volume of her absence began to

weigh upon me in the windy grayness. Not for the first time, and not for the last, had

I stared in such dull discomfort of mind at those stationary trivialities that look

almost surprised, like staring rustics, to find themselves in the stranded traveler's

field of vision: that green garbage can, those very black, very whitewalled tires for

sale, those bright cans of motor oil, that red icebox with assorted drinks, the four,

five, seven discarded bottles within the incompleted crossword puzzle of their

wooden cells, that bug patiently walking up the inside of the window of the office.

Radio music was coming from its open door, and because the rhythm was not

synchronized with the heave and flutter and other gestures of wind-animated

vegetation, one had the impression of an old scenic film living its own life while piano

or fiddle followed a line of music quite outside the shivering flower, the swaying

branch. The sound of Charlotte's last sob incongruously vibrated through me as, with

her dress fluttering athwart the rhythm, Lolita veered from a totally unexpected

direction. She had found the toilet occupied and had crossed over to the sign of the

Conche in the next block. They said there they were proud of their home-clean

restrooms. These prepaid postcards, they said, had been provided for your

comments. No postcards. No soap. Nothing. No comments. That day or the next,

after a tedious drive through a land of food crops, we reached a pleasant little burg

and put up at Chestnut Court--nice cabins, damp green grounds, apple trees, an old

swing--and a tremendous sunset which the tried child ignored. She had wanted to go

through Kasbeam because it was only thirty miles north from her home town but on

the following morning I found her quite listless, with no desire to see again the

sidewalk where she had played hopscotch some five years before. For obvious

reasons I had rather dreaded that side trip, even though we had agreed not to make

ourselves conspicuous in any way--to remain in the car and not look up old friends.

My relief at her abandoning the project was spoiled by the thought that had she felt I

were totally against the nostalgic possibilities of Pisky, as I had been last year, she

would not have given up so easily. On my mentioning this with a sigh, she sighed too

and complained of being out of sorts. She wanted to remain in bed till teatime at

least, with lots of magazines, and then if she felt better she suggested we just

continue westward. I must say she was very sweet and languid, and craved for fresh

fruits, and I decided to go and fetch her a toothsome picnic lunch in Kasbeam. Our

cabin stood on the timbered crest of a hill, and from our window you could see the

road winding down, and then running as straight as a hair parting between two rows

of chestnut trees, towards the pretty town, which looked singularly distinct and

toylike in the pure morning distance. One could make out an elf-like girl on an

insect-like bicycle, and a dog, a bit too large proportionately, all as clear as those

pilgrims and mules winding up wax-pale roads in old paintings with blue hills and red

little people. I have the European urge to use my feet when a drive can be dispensed

with, so I leisurely walked down, eventually meeting the cyclist--a plain plump girl

with pigtails, followed by a huge St. Bernard dog with orbits like pansies. In

Kasbeam a very old barber gave me a very mediocre haircut: he babbled of a

baseball-playing son of his, and, at every explodent, spat into my neck, and every

now and then wiped his glasses on my sheet-wrap, or interrupted his tremulous

scissor work to produce faded newspaper clippings, and so inattentive was I that it

came as a shock to realize as he pointed to an easeled photograph among the

ancient gray lotions, that the mustached young ball player had been dead for the last

thirty years. I had a cup of hot flavorless coffee, bought a bunch of bananas for my

monkey, and spent another ten minutes or so in a delicatessen store. At least an

hour and a half must have elapsed when this homeward-bound little pilgrim

appeared on the winding road leading to Chestnut Castle. The girl I had seen on my

way to town was now loaded with linen and engaged in helping a misshapen man

whose big head and coarse features reminded me of the "Bertoldo" character in low

Italian comedy. They were cleaning the cabins of which there was a dozen or so on

Chestnut Crest, all pleasantly spaced amid the copious verdure. It was noon, and

most of them, with a final bang of their screen doors, had already got rid of their

occupants. A very elderly, almost mummy-like couple in a very new model were in

the act of creeping out of one of the contiguous garages; from another a red hood

protruded in somewhat cod-piece fashion; and nearer to our cabin, a strong and

handsome young man with a shock of black hair and blue eyes was putting a

portable refrigerator into a station wagon. For some reason he gave me a sheepish

grin as I passed. On the grass expanse opposite, in the many-limbed shade of

luxuriant trees, the familiar St. Bernard dog was guarding his mistress' bicycle, and

nearby a young woman, far gone in the family way, had seated a rapt baby on a

swing and was rocking it gently, while a jealous boy of two or three was making a

nuisance of himself by trying to push or pull the swing board; he finally succeeded in

getting himself knocked down by it, and bawled loudly as he lay supine on the grass

while his mother continued to smile gently at neither of her present children. I recall

so clearly these minutiae probably because I was to check my impressions so

thoroughly only a few minutes later; and besides, something in me had been on

guard ever since that awful night in Beardsley. I now refused to be diverted by the

feeling of well-being that my walk had engendered--by the young summer breeze

that enveloped the nape of my neck, the giving crunch of the damn gravel, the juice

tidbit. I had sucked out at last from a hollowy tooth, and even the comfortable

weight of my provisions which the general condition of my heart should not have

allowed me to carry; but even that miserable pump of mine seemed to be working

sweetly, and I felt adolori d'amoureuse langueur, to quote dear old Ronsard, as I

reached the cottage where I had left my Dolores. To my surprise I found her

dressed. She was sitting on the edge of the bed in slacks and T-shirt, and was

looking at me as if she could not quite place me. The frank soft shape of her small

breasts was brought out rather than blurred by the limpness of her thin shirt, and

this frankness irritated me. She had not washed; yet her mouth was freshly though

smudgily painted, and her broad teeth glistened like wine-tinged ivory, or pinkish

poker chips. And there she sat, hands clasped in her lap, and dreamily brimmed with

a diabolical glow that had no relations to me whatever. I plumped down my heavy

paper bag and stood staring at the bare ankles of her sandaled feet, then at her silly

face, then again at her sinful feet. "You've been out," I said (the sandals were filthy

with gravel). "I just got up," she replied, and added upon intercepting my downward

glance: "Went out for a sec. Wanted to see if you were coming back." She became

aware of the bananas and uncoiled herself tableward. What special suspicion could I

have? None indeed--but those muddy, moony eyes of hers, that singular warmth

emanating from her! I said nothing. I looked at the road meandering so distinctly

within the frame of the window. . . Anybody wishing to betray my trust would have

found it a splendid lookout. With rising appetite, Lo applied herself to the fruit. All at

once I remembered the ingratiating grin of the Johnny next door. I stepped out

quickly. All cars had disappeared except his station wagon; his pregnant young wife

was not getting into it with her baby and the other, more or less canceled, child.

"What's the matter, where are you going?" cried Lo from the porch. I said nothing. I

pushed her softness back into the room and went in after her. I ripped her shirt off. I

unzipped the rest of her, I tore off her sandals. Wildly, I pursued the shadow of her

infidelity; but the scent I traveled upon was so slight as to be practically

undistinguishable from a madman's fancy.



17

Gros Gaston, in his prissy way, had liked to make presents--presents just a prissy

wee bit out of the ordinary, or so he prissily thought. Noticing one night that my box

of chessmen was broken, he sent me next morning, with a little lad of his, a copper

case: it had an elaborate Oriental design over the lid and could be securely locked.

Once glance sufficed to assure me that it was one of those cheap money boxes called

for some reason "luizettas" that you buy in Algiers and elsewhere, and wonder what

to do with afterwards. It turned out to be much too flat for holding my bulky

chessmen, but I kept it--using it for a totally different purpose. In order to break

some pattern of fate in which I obscurely felt myself being enmeshed, I had decided-

-despite Lo's visible annoyance--to spend another night at Chestnut Court; definitely

waking up at four in the morning, I ascertained that Lo was still sound asleep (mouth

open, in a kind of dull amazement at the curiously inane life we all had rigged up for

her) and satisfied myself that the precious contents of the "luizetta" were safe.

There, snugly wrapped in a white woolen scarf, lay a pocket automatic: caliber .32,

capacity of magazine 8 cartridges, length a little under one ninth of Lolita's length,

stock checked walnut, finish full blued. I had inherited it from the late Harold Haze,

with a 1938 catalog which cheerily said in part: "Particularly well adapted for use in

the home and car as well as on the person." There it lay, ready for instant service on

the person or persons, loaded and fully cocked with the slide lock in safety position,

thus precluding any accidental discharge. We must remember that a pistol is the

Freudian symbol of the Ur-father's central forelimb. I was now glad I had it with me-

-and even more glad that I had learned to use it two years before, in the pine forest

around my and Charlotte's glass lake. Farlow, with whom I had roamed those remote

woods, was an admirable marksman, and with his .38 actually managed to hit a

hummingbird, though I must say not much of it could be retrieved for proof--only a

little iridescent fluff. A burley ex-policeman called Krestovski, who in the twenties

had shot and killed two escaped convicts, joined us and bagged a tiny woodpecker--

completely out of season, incidentally. Between those two sportsmen I of course was

a novice and kept missing everything, though I did would a squirrel on a later

occasion when I went out alone. "You like here," I whispered to my light-weight

compact little chum, and then toasted it with a dram of gin.



18

The reader must now forget Chestnuts and Colts, and accompany us further west.

The following days were marked by a number of great thunderstorms--or perhaps,

thee was but one single storm which progressed across country in ponderous

frogleaps and which we could not shake off just as we could not shake off detective

Trapp: for it was during those days that the problem of the Aztec Red Convertible

presented itself to me, and quite overshadowed the theme of Lo's lovers. Queer! I

who was jealous of every male we met--queer, how I misinterpreted the

designations of doom. Perhaps I had been lulled by Lo's modest behavior in winter,

and anyway it would have been too foolish even for a lunatic to suppose another

Humbert was avidly following Humbert and Humbert's nymphet with Jovian

fireworks, over the great and ugly plains. I surmised, donc, that the Red Yak keeping

behind us at a discreet distance mile after mile was operated by a detective whom

some busybody had hired to see what exactly Humbert Humbert was doing with that

minor stepdaughter of his. As happens with me at periods of electrical disturbance

and crepitating lightnings, I had hallucinations. Maybe they were more than

hallucinations. I do not know what she or he, or both had put into my liquor but one

night I felt sure somebody was tapping on the door of our cabin, and I flung it open,

and noticed two things--that I was stark naked and that, white-glistening in the rain-

dripping darkness, there stood a man holding before his face the mask of Jutting

Chin, a grotesque sleuth in the funnies. He emitted a muffled guffaw and scurried

away, and I reeled back into the room, and fell asleep again, and am not sure even

to this day that the visit was not a drug-provoked dream: I have thoroughly studied

Trapp's type of humor, and this might have been a plausible sample. Oh, crude and

absolutely ruthless! Somebody, I imagined, was making money on those masks of

popular monsters and morons. Did I see next morning two urchins rummaging in a

garbage can and trying on Jutting Chin? I wonder. It may all have been a

coincidence--due to atmospheric conditions, I suppose. Being a murderer with a

sensational but incomplete and unorthodox memory, I cannot tell you, ladies and

gentlemen, the exact day when I first knew with utter certainty that the red

convertible was following us. I do remember, however, the first time I saw its driver

quite clearly. I was proceeding slowly one afternoon through torrents of rain and

kept seeing that red ghost swimming and shivering with lust in my mirror, when

presently the deluge dwindled to a patter, and then was suspended altogether. With

a swishing sound a sunburst swept the highway, and needing a pair of new

sunglasses, I pussled up at a filling station. What was happening was a sickness, a

cancer, that could not be helped, so I simply ignored the fact that our quiet pursuer,

in his converted state, stopped a little behind us at a cafe or bar bearing the idiotic

sign: The Bustle: A Deceitful Seatful. Having seen to the needs of my car, I walked

into the office to get those glasses and pay for the gas. As I was in the act of signing

a traveler's check and wondered about my exact whereabouts, I happened to glance

through a side window, and saw a terrible thing. A broad-backed man, baldish, in an

oatmeal coat and dark-brown trousers, was listening to Lo who was leaning out of

the car and talking to him very rapidly, her hand with outspread fingers going up and

down as it did when she was very serious and emphatic. What struck me with

sickening force was--how should I put it?--the voluble familiarity of her way, as if

they had known each other--oh, for weeks and weeks. I saw him scratch his cheek

and nod, and turn, and walk back to his convertible, a broad and thickish man of my

age, somewhat resembling Gustave Trapp, a cousin of my father's in Switzerland--

same smoothly tanned face, fuller than mine, with a small dark mustache and a

rosebud degenerate mouth. Lolita was studying a road map when I got back into the

car. "What did that man ask you, Lol?" "Man? Oh, that man. Oh yes. Oh, I don't

know. He wondered if I had a map. Lost his way, I guess." We drove on, and I said:

"Now listen, Lo. I do not know whether you are lying or not, and I do not know

whether you are insane or not, and I do not care for the moment; but that person

has been following us all day, and his car was at the motel yesterday, and I think he

is a cop. You know perfectly well what will happen and where you will go if the police

find out about things. Now I want to know exactly what he said to you and what you

told him." She laughed. "If he's really a cop," she said shrilly but not illogically, "the

worst thing we could do, would be to show him we are scared. Ignore him, Dad."

"Did he ask where we were going?" "Oh, he knows that" (mocking me). "Anyway," I

said, giving up, "I have seen his face now. He is not pretty. He looks exactly like a

relative of mine called Trapp." "Perhaps he is Trapp. If I were you--Oh, look, all the

nines are changing into the next thousand. When I was a little kid," she continued

unexpectedly, "I used to think they'd stop and go back to nines, if only my mother

agreed to put the car in reverse." It was the first time, I think, she spoke

spontaneously of her pre-Humbertian childhood; perhaps, the theatre had taught her

that trick; and silently we traveled on, unpursued. But next day, like pain in a fatal

disease that comes back as the drug and hope wear off, there it was again behind

us, that glossy red beast. The traffic on the highway was light that day; nobody

passed anybody; and nobody attempted to get in between our humble blue car and

its imperious red shadow--as if there were some spell cast on that interspace, a zone

of evil mirth and magic, a zone whose very precision and stability had a glass-like

virtue that was almost artistic. The driver behind me, with his stuffed shoulders and

Trappish mustache, looked like a display dummy, and his convertible seemed to

move only because an invisible rope of silent silk connected it with out shabby

vehicle. We were many times weaker than his splendid, lacquered machine, so that I

did not even attempt to outspeed him. O lente currite noctis equi! O softly run,

nightmares! We climbed long grades and rolled downhill again, and heeded speed

limits, and spared slow children, and reproduced in sweeping terms the black wiggles

of curves on their yellow shields, and no matter how and where we drove, the

enchanted interspace slid on intact, mathematical, mirage-like, the viatic counterpart

of a magic carpet. And all the time I was aware of a private blaze on my right: her

joyful eye, her flaming cheek. A traffic policeman, deep in the nightmare of

crisscross streets--at half-past-four p.m. in a factory town--was the hand of chance

that interrupted the spell. He beckoned me on, and then with the same hand cut off

my shadow. A score of cars were launched in between us, and I sped on, and deftly

turned into a narrow lane. A sparrow alighted with a jumbo bread crumb, was

tackled by another, and lost the crumb. When after a few grim stoppages and a bit

of deliberate meandering, I returned to the highway, our shadow had disappeared.

Lola snorted and said: "If he is what you think he is, how silly to give him the slip."

"I have other notions by now," I said. "You should--ah--check them by--ah--keeping

in touch with him, fahther deah," said Lo, writhing in the coils of her own sarcasm.

"Gee, you are mean," she added in her ordinary voice. We spent a grim night in a

very foul cabin, under a sonorous amplitude of rain, and with a kind of prehistorically

loud thunder incessantly rolling above us. "I am not a lady and do not like lightning,"

said Lo, whose dread of electric storms gave me some pathetic solace. We had

breakfast in the township of Soda, pop. 1001. "Judging by the terminal figure," I

remarked, "Fatface is already here." "Your humor," said Lo, "is sidesplitting, deah

fahther." We were in sage-brush country by that time, and there was a day or two of

lovely release (I had been a fool, all was well, that discomfort was merely a trapped

flatus), and presently the mesas gave way to real mountains, and, on time, we drove

into Wace. Oh, disaster. Some confusion had occurred, she had misread a date in the

Tour Book, and the Magic Cave ceremonies were over! She took it bravely, I must

admit--and, when we discovered there was in kurortish Wace a summer theatre in

full swing, we naturally drifted toward it one fair mid-June evening. I really could not

tell you the plot of the play we saw. A trivial affair, no doubt, with self-conscious

light effects and a mediocre leading lady. The only detail that pleased me was a

garland of seven little graces, more or less immobile, prettily painted, barelimbed--

seven bemused pubescent girls in colored gauze that had been recruited locally

(judging by the partisan flurry here and there among the audience) and were

supposed to represent a living rainbow, which lingered throughout the last act, and

rather teasingly faded behind a series of multiplied veils. I remember thinking that

this idea of children-colors had been lifted by authors Clare Quilty and Vivian

Darkbloom from a passage in James Joyce, and that two of the colors were quite

exasperatingly lovely--Orange who kept fidgeting all the time, and Emerald who,

when her eyes got used to the pitch-black pit where we all heavily sat, suddenly

smiled at her mother or her protector. As soon as the thing was over, and manual

applause--a sound my nerves cannot stand--began to crash all around me, I started

to pull and push Lo toward the exit, in my so natural amorous impatience to get her

back to our neon-blue cottage in the stunned, starry night: I always say nature is

stunned by the sights she sees. Dolly-Lo, however, lagged behind, in a rosy daze,

her pleased eyes narrowed, her sense of vision swamping the rest of her senses to

such an extent that her limp hands hardly came together at all in the mechanical

action of clapping they still went through. I had seen that kind of thing in children

before but, by God, this was a special child, myopically beaming at the already

remote stage where I glimpsed something of the joint authors--a man's tuxedo and

the bare shoulders of a hawk-like, black-haired, strikingly tall woman. "You've again

hurt my wrist, you brute," said Lolita in a small voice as she slipped into her car

seat. "I am dreadfully sorry, my darling, my own ultraviolet darling," I said,

unsuccessfully trying to catch her elbow, and I added, to change the conversation--

to change the direction of fate, oh God, oh God: "Vivian is quite a woman. I am sure

we saw her yesterday in that restaurant, in Soda pop." "Sometimes," said Lo, "you

are quite revoltingly dumb. First, Vivian is the male author, the gal author is Clare;

and second, she is forty, married and has Negro blood." "I thought," I said kidding

her, "Quilty was an ancient flame of yours, in the days when you loved me, in sweet

old Ramsdale." "What?" countered Lo, her features working. "that fat dentist? You

must be confusing me with some other fast little article." And I thought to myself

how those fast little articles forget everything, everything, while we, old lovers,

treasure every inch of their nymphancy.



19

With Lo's knowledge and assent, the two post offices given to the Beardsley

postmaster as forwarding addresses were P.O. Wace and P.O. Elphinstone. Next

morning we visited the former and had to wait in a short but slow queue. Serene Lo

studied the rogues' gallery. Handsome Bryan Bryanski, alias Anthony Bryan, alias

Tony Brown, eyes hazel, complexion fair, was wanted for kidnapping. A sad-eyed old

gentleman's faux-pas was mail fraud, and, as if that were not enough, he was cursed

with deformed arches. Sullen Sullivan came with a caution: Is believed armed, and

should be considered extremely dangerous. If you want to make a movie out of my

book, have one of these faces gently melt into my own, while I look. And moreover

there was a smudgy snapshot of a Missing Girl, age fourteen, wearing brown shoes

when last seen, rhymes. Please notify Sheriff Buller. I forget my letters; as to

Dolly's, there was her report and a very special-looking envelope. This I deliberately

opened and perused its contents. I concluded I was doing the foreseen since she did

not seem to mind and drifted toward the newsstand near the exit. "Dolly-Lo: Well,

the play was a grand success. All three hounds lay quiet having been slightly

drugged by Cutler, I suspect, and Linda knew all your lines. She was fine, she had

alertness and control, but lacked somehow the responsiveness, the relaxed vitality,

the charm of my--and the author's--Diana; but there was no author to applaud us as

last time, and the terrific electric storm outside interfered with our own modest

offstage thunder. Oh dear, life does fly. Now that everything is over, school, play,

the Roy mess, mother's confinement (our baby, alas, did not live!), it all seems such

a long time ago, though practically I still bear traces of the paint. "We are going to

New York after tomorrow, and I guess I can't manage to wriggle out of

accompanying my parents to Europe. I have even worse news for you. Dolly-Lo! I

may not be back at Beardsley if and when you return. With one thing and another,

one being you know who, and the other not being who you think you know, Dad

wants me to go to school in Paris for one year while he and Fullbright are around.

"As expected, poor Poet stumbled in Scene III when arriving at the bit of French

nonsense. Remember? Ne manque pas de dire yu ton amant, Chimhne, comme le lac

est beau car il faut qu'il t'y mine. Lucky beau! Qu'il t'y--What a tongue-twister! Well,

be good, Lollikins. Best love from your Poet, and best regards to the Governor. Your

Mona. P.S. Because of one thing and another, my correspondence happens to be

rigidly controlled. So better wait till I write you from Europe." (She never did as far

as I know. The letter contained an element of mysterious nastiness that I am too

tired today to analyze. I found it later preserved in one of the Tour Books, and give it

here yu titre documentaire. I read it twice.) I looked up from the letter and was

about to--There was no Lo to behold. While I was engrossed in Mona's witchery, Lo

had shrugged her shoulders and vanished. "Did you happen to see--" I asked of a

hunchback sweeping the floor near the entrance. He had, the old lecherer. He

guessed she had seen a friend and had hurried out. I hurried out too. I stopped--she

had not. I hurried on. I stopped again. It had happened at last. She had gone for

ever. In later years I have often wondered why she did not go forever that day. Was

it the retentive quality of her new summer clothes in my locked car? Was it some

unripe particle in some general plan? Was it simply because, all things considered, I

might as well be used to convey her to Elphinstone--the secret terminus, anyway? I

only know I was quite certain she had left me for ever. The noncommittal mauve

mountains half encircling the town seemed to me to swarm with panting, scrambling,

laughing, panting Lolitas who dissolved in their haze. A big W made of white stones

on a steep talus in the far vista of a cross street seemed the very initial of woe. The

new and beautiful post office I had just emerged from stood between a dormant

movie house and a conspiracy of poplars. The time was 9 a.m. mountain time. The

street was charming it into beauty, was one of those fragile young summer mornings

with flashes of glass here and there and a general air of faltering and almost fainting

at the prospect of an intolerably torrid noon. Crossing over, I loafed and leafed, as it

were, through one long block: Drugs, Real Estate, Fashions, Auto Parts, Cafe,

Sporting Goods, Real Estate, Furniture, Appliances, Western Union, Cleaners,

Grocery. Officer, officer, my daughter has run away. In collusion with a detective; in

love with a black-mailer. Took advantage of my utter helplessness. I peered into all

the stores. I deliberated inly if I should talk to any of the sparse foot-passengers. I

did not. I sat for a while in the parked car. I inspected the public garden on the east

side. I went back to Fashions and Auto Parts. I told myself with a burst of furious

sarcasm--un ricanement--that I was crazy to suspect her, that she would turn up

any minute. She did. I wheeled around and shook off the hand she had placed on my

sleeve with a timid and imbecile smile. "Get into the car," I said. She obeyed, and I

went on pacing up and down, struggling with nameless thoughts, trying to plan some

way of tackling her duplicity. Presently she left the car and was at my side again. My

sense of hearing gradually got tuned in to station Lo again, and I became aware she

was telling me that she had met a former girl friend. "Yes? Whom?" "A Beardsley

girl." "Good. I now every name in your group. Alice Adams?" "The girl was not in my

group." "Good. I have a complete student list with me. Her name please." "She was

not in my school She is just a town girl in Beardsley." "Good. I have the Beardsley

directory with me too. We'll look up all the Browns." "I only know her first name."

"Mary or Jane?" "No--Dolly, like me." "So that's the dead end" (the mirror you break

your nose against). "Good. Let us try another angle. You have been absent twenty-

eight minutes. What did the two Dollys do?" "We went to a drugstore." "And you had

there--?" "Oh, just a couple of Cokes." "Careful, Dolly. We can check that, you

know." "At least, she had. I had a glass of water." "Good. Was it that place there?"

"Sure." "Good, come on, we'll grill the soda jerk." "Wait a sec. Come to think it might

have been further down--just around the corner." "Come on all the same. Go in

please. Well, let's see." (Opening a chained telephone book.) "Dignified Funeral

Service. NO, not yet. Here we are: Druggists-Retail. Hill Drug Store. Larkin's

Pharmacy. And two more. That's all Wace seems to have in the way of soda

fountains--at least in the business section. Well, we will check them all." "Go to hell,"

she said. "Lo, rudeness will get you nowhere." "Okay," she said. "But you're not

going to trap me. Okay, so we did not have a pop. We just talked and looked at

dresses in show windows." "Which? That window there for example?" "Yes, that one

there, for example." "Oh Lo! Let's look closer at it." It was indeed a pretty sight. A

dapper young fellow was vacuum-cleaning a carpet upon which stood two figures

that looked as if some blast had just worked havoc with them. One figure was stark

naked, wigless and armless. Its comparatively small stature and smirking pose

suggested that when clothed it had represented, and would represent when clothed

again, a girl-child of Lolita's size. But in its present state it was sexless. Next to it,

stood a much taller veiled bride, quite perfect and intact except for the lack of one

arm. On the floor, at the feet of these damsels, where the man crawled about

laboriously with his cleaner, there lay a cluster of three slender arms, and a blond

wig. Two of the arms happened to be twisted and seemed to suggest a clasping

gesture of horror and supplication. "Look, Lo," I said quietly. "Look well. Is not that a

rather good symbol of something or other? However"--I went on as we got back into

the car--"I have taken certain precautions. Here (delicately opening the glove

compartment), on this pad I have our boy friend's car number." As the ass I was I

had not memorized it. What remained of it in my mind were the initial letter and the

closing figure as if the whole amphitheater of six signs receded concavely behind a

tinted glass too opaque to allow the central series to be deciphered, but just

translucent enough to make out its extreme edges--a capital P and a 6. I have to go

into those details (which in themselves can interest only a professional psychologue)

because otherwise the reader (ah, if I could visualize him as a blond-bearded scholar

with rosy lips sucking la pomme de sa canne as he quaffs my manuscript!) might not

understand the quality of the shock I experienced upon noticing that the P had

acquired the bustle of a B and that the 6 had been deleted altogether. The rest, with

erasures revealing the hurried shuttle smear of a pencil's rubber end, and with parts

of numbers obliterated or reconstructed in a child's hand, presented a tangle of

barbed wire to any logical interpretation. All I knew was the state--one adjacent to

the state Beardsley was in. I said nothing. I put the pad back, closed the

compartment, and drove out of Wace. Lo had grabbed some comics from the back

seat and, mobile-white-bloused, one brown elbow out of the window, was deep in

the current adventure of some clout or clown. Three or four miles out of Wace, I

turned into the shadow of a picnic ground where the morning had dumped its litter of

light on an empty table; Lo looked up with a semi-smile of surprise and without a

word I delivered a tremendous backhand cut that caught her smack on her hot hard

little cheekbone. And then the remorse, the poignant sweetness of sobbing

atonement, groveling love, the hopelessness of sensual reconciliation. In the velvet

night, at Mirana Motel (Mirana!) I kissed the yellowish soles of her long-toed feet, I

immolated myself . . . But it was all of no avail. both doomed were we. And soon I

was to enter a new cycle of persecution. In a street of Wace, on its outskirts . . . Oh,

I am quite sure it was not a delusion. In a street of Wace, I had glimpsed the Aztec

Red Convertible, or its identical twin. Instead of Trapp, it contained four or five loud

young people of several sexes--but I said nothing. After Wace a totally new situation

arose. For a day or two, I enjoyed the mental emphasis with which I told myself that

we were not, and never had been followed; and then I became sickeningly conscious

that Trapp had changed his tactics and was still with us, in this or that rented car. A

veritable Proteus of the highway, with bewildering ease he switched from one vehicle

to another. This technique implied the existence of garages specializing in "stage-

automobile" operations, but I never could discover the remises he used. He seemed

to patronize at first the Chevrolet genus, beginning with a Campus Cream

convertible, then going on to a small Horizon Blue sedan, and thenceforth fading into

Surf Gray and Driftwood Gray. Then he turned to other makes and passed through a

pale dull rainbow of paint shades, and one day I found myself attempting to cope

with the subtle distinction between our own Dream Blue Melmoth and the Crest Blue

Oldsmobile he had rented; grays, however, remained his favorite cryptochromism,

and, in agonizing nightmares, I tried in vain to sort out properly such ghosts as

Chrysler's Shell Gray, Chevrolet's Thistle Gray, Dodge's French Gray . . . The

necessity of being constantly on the lookout for his little mustache and open shirt--or

for his baldish pate and broad shoulders--led me to a profound study of all cars on

the road--behind, before, alongside, coming, going, every vehicle under the dancing

sun: the quiet vacationist's automobile with the box of Tender-Touch tissues in the

back window; the recklessly speeding jalopy full of pale children with a shaggy dog's

head protruding, and a crumpled mudguard; the bachelor's tudor sedan crowded

with suits on hangers; the huge fat house trailer weaving in front, immune to the

Indian file of fury boiling behind it; the car with the young female passenger politely

perched in the middle of the front seat to be closer to the young male driver; the car

carrying on its roof a red boat bottom up . . . The gray car slowing up before us, the

gray car catching up with us. We were in mountain country, somewhere between

Snow and Champion, and rolling down an almost imperceptible grade, when I had

my next distinct view of Detective Paramour Trapp. The gray mist behind us had

deepened and concentrated into the compactness of a Dominion Blue sedan. All of a

sudden, as if the car I drove responded to my poor heart's pangs, we were slithering

from side to side, with something making a helpless plap-plap-plap under us. "You

got a flat, mister," said cheerful Lo. I pulled up--near a precipice. She folded her

arms and put her foot on the dashboard. I got out and examined the right rear

wheel. The base of its tire was sheepishly and hideously square. Trapp had stopped

some fifty yards behind us. His distant face formed a grease spot of mirth. This was

my chance. I started to walk towards him--with the brilliant idea of asking him for a

jack through I had one. He backed a little. I stubbed my toe against a stone--and

there was a sense of general laughter. Then a tremendous truck loomed from behind

Trapp and thundered by me--and immediately after, I heard it utter a convulsive

honk. Instinctively I looked back--and saw my own car gently creeping away. I could

make out Lo ludicrously at the wheel, and the engine was certainly running--though I

remembered I had cut it but had not applied the emergency brake; and during the

brief space of throb-time that it took me to reach the croaking machine which came

to a standstill at last, it dawned upon me that during the last two years little Lo had

had ample time to pick up the rudiments of driving. As I wrenched the door open, I

was goddamn sure she had started the car to prevent me from walking up to Trapp.

Her trick proved useless, however, for even while I was puruing her he had made an

energetic U-turn and was gone. I rested for a while. Lo asked wasn't I going to thank

her--the car had started to move by itself and--Getting no answer, she immersed

herself in a study of the map. I got out again and commenced the "ordeal of the

orb," as Charlotte used to say. Perhaps, I was losing my mind. We continued our

grotesque journey. After a forlorn and useless dip, we went up and up. On a steep

grade I found myself behind the gigantic truck that had overtaken us. It was now

groaning up a winding road and was impossible to pass. Out of its front part a small

oblong of smooth silver--the inner wrapping of chewing gum--escaped and flew back

into our windshield. It occurred to me that if I were really losing my mind, I might

end by murdering somebody. In fact--said high-and-dry Humbert to floundering

Humbert--it might be quite clever to prepare things--to transfer the weapon from

box to pocket--so as to be ready to take advantage of the spell of insanity when it

does come.



20

By permitting Lolita to study acting I had, fond fool, suffered her to cultivate deceit.

It now appeared that it had not been merely a matter of learning the answers to

such questions as what is the basic conflict in "Hedda Gabler," or where are the

climaxes in "Love Under the Lindens," or analyze the prevailing mood of "Cherry

Orchard"; it was really a matter of learning to betray me. How I deplored now the

exercises in sensual simulation that I had so often seen her go through in our

Beardsley parlor when I would observe her from some strategic point while she, like

a hypnotic subject of a performer in a mystic rite, produced sophisticated version of

infantile make-believe by going through the mimetic actions of hearing a moan in the

dark, seeing for the first time a brand new young stepmother, tasting something she

hated, such as buttermilk, smelling crushed grass in a lush orchard, or touching

mirages of objects with her sly, slender, girl-child hands. Among my papers I still

have a mimeographed sheet suggesting: Tactile drill. Imagine Yourself picking up

and holding: a pingpong ball, an apple, a sticky date, a new flannel-fluffed tennis

ball, a hot potato, an ice cube, a kitten, a puppy, a horseshoe, a feather, a flashlight.

Knead with your fingers the following imaginary things: a piece of brad, india rubber,

a friend's aching temple, a sample of velvet, a rose petal. You are a blind girl.

Palpate the face of: a Greek youth, Cyrano, Santa Claus, a baby, a laughing faun, a

sleeping stranger, your father. But she had been so pretty in the weaving of those

delicate spells, in the dreamy performance of her enchantments and duties! On

certain adventurous evenings, in Beardsley, I also had her dance for me with the

promise of some treat or gift, and although these routine leg-parted leaps of hers

were more like those of a football cheerleader than like the languorous and jerky

motions of a Parisian petit rat, the rhythms of her not quite nubile limbs had given

me pleasure. But all that was nothing, absolutely nothing, to the indescribable itch of

rapture that her tennis game produced in me--the teasing delirious feeling of

teetering on the very brink of unearthly order and splendor. Despite her advanced

age, she was more of a nymphet than ever, with her apricot-colored limbs, in her

sub-teen tennis togs! Winged gentlemen! No hereafter is acceptable if it does not

produce her as she was then, in that Colorado resort between Snow and Elphinstone,

with everything right: the white wide little-boy shorts, the slender waist, the apricot

midriff, the white breast-kerchief whose ribbons went up and encircled her neck to

end behind in a dangling knot leaving bare her gaspingly young and adorable apricot

shoulder blades with that pubescence and those lovely gentle bones, and the

smooth, downward-tapering back. Her cap had a white peak. Her racket had cost me

a small fortune. Idiot, triple idiot! I could have filmed her! I would have had her now

with me, before my eyes, in the projection room of my pain and despair! She would

wait and relax for a bar or two of white-lined time before going into the act of

serving, and often bounced the ball once or twice, or pawed the ground a little,

always at ease, always rather vague about the score, always cheerful as she so

seldom was in the dark life she led at home. Her tennis was the highest point to

which I can imagine a young creature bringing the art of make-believe, although I

daresay, for her it was the very geometry of basic reality. The exquisite clarity of all

her movements had its auditory counterpart in the pure ringing sound of her every

stroke. The ball when it entered her aura of control became somehow whiter, its

resilience somehow richer, and the instrument of precision she used upon it seemed

inordinately prehensile and deliberate at the moment of clinging contact. Her form

was, indeed, an absolutely perfect imitation of absolutely top-notch tennis--without

any utilitarian results. As Edusa's sister, Electra Gold, a marvelous young coach, said

to me once while I sat on a pulsating hard bench watching Dolores Haze toying with

Linda Hall (and being beaten by her): "Dolly has a magnet in the center of her racket

guts, but why the heck is she so polite?" Ah, Electra, what did it matter, with such

grace! I remember at the very first game I watched being drenched with an almost

painful convulsion of beauty assimilation. My Lolita had a way of raising her bent left

knee at the ample and springy start of the service cycle when there would develop

and hang in the sun for a second a vital web of balance between toed foot, pristine

armpit, burnished arm and far back-flung racket, as she smiled up with gleaming

teeth at the small globe suspended so high in the zenith of the powerful and graceful

cosmos she had created for the express purpose of falling upon it with a clean

resounding crack of her golden whip. It had, that serve of hers, beauty, directness,

youth, a classical purity of trajectory, and was, despite its spanking pace, fairly easy

to return, having as it did no twist or sting to its long elegant hop. That I could have

had all her strokes, all her enchantments, immortalized in segments of celluloid,

makes me moan today with frustration. They would have been so much more than

the snapshots I burned! Her overhead volley was related to her service as the envoy

is to the ballade; for she had been trained, my pet, to patter up at once to the net on

her nimble, vivid, white-shod feet. There was nothing to choose between her

forehand and backhand drives: they were mirror images of one another--my very

loins still tingle with those pistol reports repeated by crisp echoes and Electra's cries.

One of the pearls of Dolly's game was a short half-volley that Ned Litam had taught

her in California. She preferred acting to swimming, and swimming to tennis; yet I

insist that had not something within her been broken by me--not that I realized it

then!--she would have had on the top of her perfect form the will to win, and would

have become a real girl champion. Dolores, with two rackets under her arm, in

Wimbledon. Dolores endorsing a Dromedary. Dolores turning professional. Dolores

acting a girl champion in a movie. Dolores and her gray, humble, hushed husband-

coach, old Humbert. There was nothing wrong or deceitful in the spirit of her game--

unless one considered her cheerful indifference toward its outcome as the feint of a

nymphet. She who was so cruel and crafty in everyday life, revealed an innocence, a

frankness, a kindness of ball-placing, that permitted a second-rate but determined

player, no matter how uncouth and incompetent, to poke and cut his way to victory.

Despite her small stature, she covered the one thousand and fifty-three square feet

of her half of the court with wonderful ease, once she had entered into the rhythm of

a rally and as long as she could direct that rhythm; but any abrupt attack, or sudden

change of tactics on her adversary's part, left her helpless. At match point, her

second serve, which--rather typically--was even stronger and more stylish than her

first (for she had none of the inhibitions that cautious winners have), would strike

vibrantly the hard-cord of the net--and ricochet out of court. The polished gem of her

dropshot was snapped up and put away by an opponent who seemed four-legged

and wielded a crooked paddle. Her dramatic drives and lovely volleys would candidly

fall at his feet. Over and over again she would land an easy one into the net--and

merrily mimic dismay by drooping in a ballet attitude, with her forelocks hanging. So

sterile were her grace and whipper that she could not even win from panting me and

my old-fashioned lifting drive. I suppose I am especially susceptible to the magic of

games. In my chess sessions with Gaston I saw the board as a square pool of limpid

water with rare shells and stratagems rosily visible upon the smooth tessellated

bottom, which to my confused adversary was all ooze and squid-cloud. Similarly, the

initial tennis coaching I had inflicted on Lolita--prior to the revelations that came to

her through the great Californian's lessons--remained in my mind as oppressive and

distressful memories--not only because she had been so hopelessly and irritatingly

irritated by every suggestion of mine--but because the precious symmetry of the

court instead of reflecting the harmonies latent in her was utterly jumbled by the

clumsiness and lassitude of the resentful child I mistaught. Now things were

different, and on that particular day, in the pure air of Champion, Colorado, on that

admirable court at the foot of seep stone stairs leading up to Champion Hotel where

we had spent the night, I felt I could rest from the nightmare of unknown betrayals

within the innocence of her style, of her soul, of her essential grace. She was hitting

hard and flat, with her usual effortless sweep, feeding me deep skimming balls--all

so rhythmically coordinated and overt as to reduce my footwork to, practically, a

swinging stroll--crack players will understand what I mean. My rather heavily cut

serve that I had been taught by my father who had learned it from Decugis or

Borman, old friends of his and great champions, would have seriously troubled my

Lo, had I really tried to trouble her. But who would upset such a lucid dear? Did I

ever mention that her bare arm bore the 8 of vaccination? That I loved her

hopelessly? That she was only fourteen? An inquisitive butterfly passed, dipping,

between us. Two people in tennis shorts, a red-haired fellow only about eight years

my junior, and an indolent dark girl with a moody mouth and hard eyes, about two

years Lolita's senior, appeared from nowhere. As is common with dutiful tyros, their

rackets were sheathed and framed, and they carried them not as if they were the

natural and comfortable extensions of certain specialized muscles, but hammers or

blunderbusses or whimbles, or my own dreadful cumbersome sins. Rather

unceremoniously seating themselves near my precious coat, on a bench adjacent to

the court, they fell to admiring very vocally a rally of some fifty exchanges that Lo

innocently helped me to foster and uphold--until there occurred a syncope in the

series causing her to gasp as her overhead smash went out of court, whereupon she

melted into winsome merriment, my golden pet. I felt thirsty by then, and walked to

the drinking fountain; there Red approached me and in all humility suggested a

mixed double. "I am Bill Mead," he said. "And that's Fay Page, actress. Maffy On

Say"--he added (pointing with his ridiculously hooded racket at polished Fay who

was already talking to Dolly). I was about to reply "Sorry, but--" (for I hate to have

my filly involved in the chops and jabs of cheap bunglers), when a remarkably

melodious cry diverted my attention: a bellboy was tripping down the steps from the

hotel to our court and making me signs. I was wanted, if you please, on an urgent

long distance call--so urgent in fact that the line was being held for me. Certainly. I

got into my coat (inside pocket heavy with pistol) and told Lo I would be back in a

minute. She was picking up a ball--in the continental foot-racket way which was one

of the few nice things I had taught her,--and smiled--she smiled at me! An awful

calm kept my heart afloat as I followed the boy up to the hotel. This, to use an

American term, in which discovery, retribution, torture, death, eternity appear in the

shape of a singularly repulsive nutshell, was it. I had left her in mediocre hands, but

it hardly mattered now. I would fight, of course. Oh, I would fight. Better destroy

everything than surrender her. Yes, quite a climb. At the desk, dignified, Roman-

nosed man, with, I suggest, a very obscure past that might reward investigation,

handed me a message in his own hand. The line had not been held after all. The note

said: "Mr. Humbert. The head of Birdsley (sic!) School called. Summer residence--

Birdsley 2-8282. Please call back immediately. Highly important." I folded myself into

a booth, took a little pill, and four about twenty minutes tussled with space-spooks.

A quartet of propositions gradually became audible: soprano, there was no such

number in Beardsley; alto, Miss Pratt was on her way to England; tenor, Beardsley

School had not telephoned; bass, they could not have done so, since nobody knew I

was, that particular day, in Champion, Colo. Upon my stinging him, the Roman took

the trouble to find out if there had been a long distance call. There had been none. A

fake call from some local dial was not excluded. I thanked him. He said: You bet.

After a visit to the purling men's room and a stiff drink at the bar, I started on my

return march. From the very first terrace I saw, far below, on the tennis court which

seemed the size of a school child's ill-wiped slate, golden Lolita playing in a double.

She moved like a fair angel among three horrible Boschian cripples. One of these,

her partner, while changing sides, jocosely slapped her on her behind with his

racket. He had a remarkably round head and wore incongruous brown trousers.

There was a momentary flurry--he saw me, and throwing away his racket--mine--

scuttled up the slope. He waved his wrists and elbows in a would-be comical

imitation of rudimentary wings, as he climbed, blow-legged, to the street, where his

gray car awaited him. Next moment he and the grayness were gone. When I came

down, the remaining trio were collecting and sorting out the balls. "Mr. Mead, who

was that person?" Bill and Fay, both looking very solemn, shook their heads. That

absurd intruder had butted in to make up a double, hadn't he, Dolly? Dolly. The

handle of my racket was still disgustingly warm. Before returning to the hotel, I

ushered her into a little alley half-smothered in fragrant shrubs, with flowers like

smoke, and was about to burst into ripe sobs and plead with her imperturbed dream

in the most abject manner for clarification, no matter how meretricious, of the slow

awfulness enveloping me, when we found ourselves behind the convulsed Mead

twosome--assorted people, you know, meeting among idyllic settings in old

comedies. Bill and Fay were both weak with laughter--we had come at the end of

their private joke. It did not really matter. Speaking as if it really did not really

matter, and assuming, apparently, that life was automatically rolling on with all its

routine pleasures, Lolita said she would like to change into her bathing things, and

spend the rest of the afternoon at the swimming pool. It was a gorgeous day. Lolita!



21

"Lo! Lola! Lolita!" I hear myself crying from a doorway into the sun, with the

acoustics of time, domed time, endowing my call and its tell-tale hoarseness with

such a wealth of anxiety, passion and pain that really it would have been

instrumental in wrenching open the zipper of her nylon shroud had she been dead.

Lolita! In the middle of a trim turfed terrace I found her at last--she had run out

before I was ready. Oh Lolita! There she was playing with a damned dog, not me.

The animal, a terrier of sorts, was losing and snapping up again and adjusting

between his jaws a wet little red ball; he took rapid chords with his front paws on the

resilient turf, and then would bounce away. I had only wanted to see where she was,

I could not swim with my heart in that state, but who cared--and there she was, and

there was I, in my robe--and so I stopped calling; but suddenly something in the

pattern of her motions, as she dashed this way and that in her Aztec Red bathing

briefs and bra, struck me . . . there was an ecstasy, a madness about her frolics that

was too much of a glad thing. Even the dog seemed puzzled by the extravagance of

her reactions. I put a gentle hand to my chest as I surveyed the situation. The

turquoise blue swimming pool some distance behind the lawn was no longer behind

that lawn, but within my thorax, and my organs swam in it like excrements in the

blue sea water in Nice. One of the bathers had left the pool and, half-concealed by

the peacocked shade of trees, stood quite still, holding the ends of the towel around

his neck and following Lolita with his amber eyes. There he stood, in the camouflage

of sun and shade, disfigured by them and masked by his own nakedness, his damp

black hair or what was left of it, glued to his round head, his little mustache a humid

smear, the wool on his chest spread like a symmetrical trophy, his naval pulsating,

his hirsute thighs dripping with bright droplets, his tight wet black bathing trunks

bloated and bursting with vigor where his great fat bullybag was pulled up and back

like a padded shield over his reversed beasthood. And as I looked at his oval nut-

brown face, it dawned upon me that what I had recognized him by was the reflection

of my daughter's countenance--the same beatitude and grimace but made hideous

by his maleness. And I also knew that the child, my child, knew he was looking,

enjoyed the lechery of his look and was putting on a show of gambol and glee, the

vile and beloved slut. As she made for the ball and missed it, she fell on her back,

with her obscene young legs madly pedaling in the air; I could sense the musk of her

excitement from where I stood, and then I saw (petrified with a kind of sacred

disgust) the man close his eyes and bare his small, horribly small and even, teeth as

he leaned against a tree in which a multitude of dappled Priaps shivered.

Immediately afterwards a marvelous transformation took place. He was no longer

the satyr but a very good-natured and foolish Swiss cousin, the Gustave Trapp I

have mentioned more than once, who used to counteract his "sprees" (he drank beer

with milk, the good swine) by feats of weight-lifting--tottering and grunting on a lake

beach with his otherwise very complete bathing suit jauntily stripped from one

shoulder. This Trapp noticed me from afar and working the towel on his name

walked back with false insouciance to the pool. And as if the sun had gone out of the

game, Lo slackened and slowly got up ignoring the ball that the terrier placed before

her. Who can say what heartbreaks are caused in a dog by our discontinuing a

romp? I started to say something, and then sat down on the grass with a quite

monstrous pain in my chest and vomited a torrent of browns and greens that I had

never remembered eating. I saw Lolita's eyes, and they seemed to be more

calculating than frightened. I heard her saying to a kind lady that her father was

having a fit. Then for a long time I lay in a lounge chair swallowing pony upon pony

of gin. And next morning I felt strong enough to drive on (which in later years no

doctor believed).



22

The two-room cabin we had ordered at Silver Spur Court, Elphinstone, turned out to

belong to the glossily browned pine-log kind that Lolita used to be so fond of in the

days of our carefree first journey; oh, how different things were now! I am not

referring to Trapp or Trapps. After all--well, really . . . After all, gentlemen, it was

becoming abundantly clear that all those identical detectives in prismatically

changing cars were figments of my persecution mania, recurrent images based on

coincidence and chance resemblance. Soyons logiques, crowed the cocky Gallic part

of my brain--and proceeded to rout the notion of a Lolita-maddened salesman or

comedy gangster, with stooges, persecuting me, and hoaxing me, and otherwise

taking riotous advantage of my strange relations with the law. I remember humming

my panic away. I remember evolving even an explanation of the "Birdsley" telephone

call . . . But if I could dismiss Trapp, as I had dismissed my convulsions on the lawn

at Champion, I could do nothing with the anguish of knowing Lolita to be so

tantalizingly, so miserably unattainable and beloved on the very even of a new era,

when my alembics told me she should stop being a nymphet, stop torturing me. An

additional, abominable, and perfectly gratuitous worry was lovingly prepared for me

in Elphinstone. Lo had been dull and silent during the last lap--two hundred

mountainous miles uncontaminated by smoke-gray sleuths or zigzagging zanies. She

hardly glanced at the famous, oddly shaped, splendidly flushed rock which jutted

above the mountains and had been the take-off for nirvana on the part of a

temperamental show girl. The town was newly built, or rebuilt, on the flat floor of a

seven-thousand-foot-high valley; it would soon bore Lo, I hoped, and we would spin

on to California, to the Mexican border, to mythical bays, saguaro desserts,

fatamorganas. Josi Lizzarrabengoa, as you remember, planned to take his Carmen to

the Etats Unis. I conjured up a Central American tennis competition in which Dolores

Haze and various Californian schoolgirl champions would dazzlingly participate.

Good-will tours on that smiling level eliminate the distinction between passport and

sport. Why did I hope we would be happy abroad? A change of environment is the

traditional fallacy upon which doomed loves, and lungs, rely. Mrs. Hays, the brisk,

briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court, asked me if I were Swiss

perchance, because her sister had married a Swiss ski instructor. I was, whereas my

daughter happened to be half Irish. I registered, Hays gave me the key and a

tinkling smile, and, still twinkling, showed me where to park the car; Lo crawled out

and shivered a little: the luminous evening air was decidedly crisp. Upon entering the

cabin, she sat down on a chair at a card table, buried her face in the crook of her

arm and said she felt awful. Shamming, I thought, shamming, no doubt, to evade

my caresses; I was passionately parched; but she began to whimper in an unusually

dreary way when I attempted to fondle her. Lolita ill. Lolita dying. Her skin was

scalding hot! I took her temperature, orally, then looked up a scribbled formula I

fortunately had in a jotter and after laboriously reducing the, meaningless to me,

degrees Fahrenheit to the intimate centigrade of my childhood, found she had 40.4,

which at least made sense. Hysterical little nymphs might, I knew, run up all kinds of

temperature--even exceeding a fatal count. And I would have given her a sip of hot

spiced wine, and two aspirins, and kissed the fever away, if, upon an examination of

her lovely uvula, one of the gems of her body, I had not seen that it was a burning

red. I undressed her. Her breath was bittersweet. Her brown rose tasted of blood.

She was shaking from head to toe. She complained of a painful stiffness in the upper

vertebrae--and I thought of poliomyelitis as any American parent would. Giving up

all hope of intercourse, I wrapped her in a laprobe and carried her into the car. Kind

Mrs. Hays in the meantime had alerted the local doctor. "You are lucky it happened

here," she said; for not only was Blue the best man in the district, but the

Elphinstone hospital was as modern as modern could be, despite its limited capacity.

With a heterosexual Erlkzhnig in pursuit, thither I drove, half-blinded by a royal

sunset on the lowland side and guided by a little old woman, a portable witch,

perhaps his daughter, whom Mrs. Haus had lent me, and whom I was never to see

again. Dr. Blue, whose learning, no doubt, was infinitely inferior to his reputation,

assured me it was a virus infection, and when I alluded to her comparatively recent

flu, curtly said this was another bug, he had forty such cases on his hands; all of

which sounded like the "ague" of the ancients. I wondered if I should mention, with a

casual chuckle, that my fifteen-year-old daughter had had a minor accident while

climbing an awkward fence with her boy friend, but knowing I was drunk, I decided

to withhold the information till later if necessary. To an unsmiling blond bitch of a

secretary I gave my daughter's age as "practically sixteen." While I was not looking,

my child was taken away from me! In vain I insisted I be allowed to spend the night

on a "welcome" mat in a corner of their damned hospital. I ran up constructivistic

flights of stairs, I tried to trace my darling so as to tell her she had better not babble,

especially if she felt as lightheaded as we all did. At one point, I was rather

dreadfully rude to a very young and very cheeky nurse with overdeveloped gluteal

parts and blazing black eyes--of Basque descent, as I learned. Her father was an

imported shepherd, a trainer of sheep dogs. Finally, I returned to the car and

remained in it for I do not know how many hours, hunched up in the dark, stunned

by my new solitude, looking out open-mouthed now at the dimly illumined, very

square and low hospital building squatting in the middle of its lawny block, now up at

the wash of stars and the jagged silvery ramparts of the haute montagne where at

the moment Mary's father, lonely Joseph Lore was dreaming of Oloron, Lagore,

Rolas--que sais-je!--or seducing a ewe. Such-like fragrant vagabond thoughts have

been always a solace to me in times of unusual stress, and only when, despite liberal

libations, I felt fairly numbed by the endless night, did I think of driving back to the

motel. The old woman had disappeared, and I was not quite sure of my way. Wide

gravel roads criss-crossed drowsy rectangular shadows. I made out what looked like

the silhouette of gallows on what was probably a school playground; and in another

wastelike black there rose in domed silence the pale temple of some local sect. I

found the highway at last, and then the motel, where millions of so-called "millers,"

a kind of insect, were swarming around the neon contours of "No Vacancy"; and,

when, at 3 a.m., after one of those untimely hot showers which like some mordant

only help to fix a man's despair and weariness, I lay on her bed that smelled of

chestnuts and roses, and peppermint, and the very delicate, very special French

perfume I latterly allowed her to use, I found myself unable to assimilate the simple

fact that for the first time in two years I was separated from my Lolita. All at once it

occurred to me that her illness was somehow the development of a theme--that it

had the same taste and tone as the series of linked impressions which had puzzled

and tormented me during our journey; I imagined that secret agent, or secret lover,

or prankster, or hallucination, or whatever he was, prowling around the hospital--and

Aurora had hardly "warmed her hands," as the pickers of lavender way in the

country of my birth, when I found myself trying to get into that dungeon again,

knocking upon its green doors, breakfastless, stool-less, in despair. This was

Tuesday, and Wednesday or Thursday, splendidly reacting like the darling she was to

some "serum" (sparrow's sperm or dugong's dung), she was much better, and the

doctor said that in a couple of days she would be "skipping" again. Of the eight times

I visited her, the last one alone remains sharply engraved on my mind. It had been a

great feat to come for I felt all hollowed out by the infection that by then was at

work on me too. None will know the strain it was to carry that bouquet, that load of

love, those books that I had traveled sixty miles to buy: Browning's Dramatic Works,

The history of Dancing, Clowns and Columbines, The Russian Ballet, Flowers of the

Rockies, the Theatre Guild Anthology, Tennis by Helen Wills, who had won the

National Junior Girl Singles at the age of fifteen. As I was staggering up to the door

of my daughter's thirteen-dollar-a day private room, Mary Lore, the beastly young

part-time nurse who had taken an unconcealed dislike to me, emerged with a

finished breakfast tray, placed it with a quick crash on a chair in the corridor, and,

fundament jigging, shot back into the room--probably to warn her poor little Dolores

that the tyrannical old father was creeping up on crepe soles, with books and

bouquet: the latter I had composed of wild flowers and beautiful leaves gathered

with my own gloved hands on a mountain pass at sunrise (I hardly slept at all that

fateful week). Feeding my Carmencita well? Idly I glanced at the tray. On a yolk-

stained plate there was a crumpled envelope. It had contained something, since one

edge was torn, but there was no address on it--nothing at all, save a phony armorial

design with "Ponderosa Lodge" in green letters; thereupon I performed a chassi-

croisi with Mary, who was in the act of bustling out again--wonderful how fast they

move and how little they do, those rumpy young nurses. She glowered at the

envelope I had put back, uncrumpled. "You better not touch," she said, nodding

directionally. "Could burn your fingers." Below my dignity to rejoin. All I said was:

"Je croyais que c'itait un bill--not a billet doux." Then, entering the sunny room, to

Lolita: "Bonjour, mon petit." "Dolores," said Mary Lore, entering with me, past me,

though me, the plump whore, and blinking, and starting to fold very rapidly a white

flannel blanket as she blinked: "Dolores, your pappy thinks you are getting letters

from my boy friend. It's me (smugly tapping herself on the small gilt cross she wore)

gets them. And my pappy can parlay-voo as well as yours." She left the room.

Dolores, so rosy and russet, lips freshly painted, hair brilliantly brushed, bare arms

straightened out on neat coverleat, lay innocently beaming at me or nothing. On the

bed table, next to a paper napkin and a pencil, her topaz ring burned in the sun.

"what gruesome funeral flowers," she said. "Thanks all the same. But do you mind

very much cutting out the French? It annoys everybody." Back at the usual rush

came the ripe young hussy, reeking of urine and garlic, with the Desert News, which

her fair patient eagerly accepted, ignoring the sumptuously illustrated volumes I had

brought. "My sister Ann," said Marry (topping information with afterthought), "works

at the Ponderosa place." Poor Bluebeard. Those brutal brothers. Est-ce que tu ne

m'aimes plus, ma Carmen? She never had. At the moment I knew my love was as

hopeless as ever--and I also knew the two girls were conspirators, plotting in

Basque, or Zemfirian, against my hopeless love. I shall go further and say that Lo

was playing a double game since she was also fooling sentimental Mary whom she

had told, I suppose, that she wanted to dwell with her fun-loving young uncle and

not with cruel melancholy me. And another nurse whom I never identified, and the

village idiot who carted cots and coffins into the elevator, and the idiotic green love

birds in a cage in the waiting room--all were in the plot, the sordid plot. I suppose

Mary thought comedy father Professor Humbertoldi was interfering with the romance

between Dolores and her father-substitute, roly-poly Romeo (for you were rather

lardy, you know, Rom, despite all that "snow" and "joy juice"). My throat hurt. I

stood, swallowing, at the window and stared at the mountains, at the romantic rock

high up in the smiling plotting sky. "My Carmen," I said (I used to call her that

sometimes), "we shall leave this raw sore town as soon as you get out of bed."

"Incidentally, I want all my clothes," said the gitanilla, humping up her knees and

turning to another page. ". . . Because, really," I continued, "there is no point in

staying here." "There is no point in staying anywhere," said Lolita. I lowered myself

into a cretonne chair and, opening the attractive botanical work, attempted, in the

fever-humming hush of the room, to identify my flowers. This proved impossible.

Presently a musical bell softly sounded somewhere in the passage. I do not think

they had more than a dozen patients (three or four were lunatics, as Lo had

cheerfully informed me earlier) in that show place of a hospital, and the staff had too

much leisure. However--likewise for reasons of show--regulations were rigid. It is

also true that I kept coming at the wrong hours. Not without a secret flow of dreamy

malice, visionary Mary (next time it will be une belle dame toute en bleu floating

through Roaring Gulch) plucked me by the sleeve to lead me out. I looked at her

hand; it dropped. As I was leaving, leaving voluntarily, Dolores Haze reminded me to

bring her next morning . . . She did not remember where the various things she

wanted were . . . "Bring me," she cried (out of sight already, door on the move,

closing, closed), "the new gray suitcase and Mother's trunk"; but by next morning I

was shivering, and boozing, and dying nit he motel bed she had used for just a few

minutes, and the best I could do under the circular and dilating circumstances was to

send the two bags over with the widow's beau, a robust and kindly trucker. I

imagined Lo displaying her treasures to Mary . . . No doubt, I was a little delirious--

and on the following day I was still a vibration rather than a solid, for when I looked

out the bathroom window at the adjacent lawn, I saw Dolly's beautiful young bicycle

propped up there on its support, the graceful front wheel looking away from me, as it

always did, and a sparrow perched on the saddle--but it was the landlady's bike, and

smiling a little, and shaking my poor head over my fond fancies, I tottered back to

my bed, and lay as quiet as a saint-- Saint, forsooth! While brown Dolores, On a

patch of sunny green With Sanchicha reading stories In a movie magazine-- --which

was represented by numerous specimens wherever Dolores landed, and there was

some great national celebration in town judging by the firecrackers, veritable bombs,

that exploded all the time, and at five minutes to two p.m. I heard the sound of

whistling lips nearing the half-opened door of my cabin, and then a thump upon it. It

was big Frank. He remained framed in the opened door, one hand on its jamb,

leaning forward a little. Howdy. Nurse Lore was on the telephone. She wanted to

know was I better and would I come today? At twenty paces Frank used to look a

mountain of health; at five, as now, he was a ruddy mosaic of scars--had been blown

through a wall overseas; but despite nameless injuries he was able to man a

tremendous truck, fish, hunt, drink, and buoyantly dally with roadside ladies. That

day, either because it was such a great holiday, or simply because he wanted to

divert a sick man, he had taken off the glove he usually wore on his left hand (the

one pressing against the side of the door) and revealed to the fascinated sufferer not

only an entire lack of fourth and fifth fingers, but also a naked girl, with cinnabar

nipples and indigo delta, charmingly tattooed on the back of his crippled hand, its

index and middle digit making her legs while his wrist bore her flower-crowned head.

Oh, delicious . . . reclining against the woodwork, like some sly fairy. I asked him to

tell Mary Lore I would stay in bed all day and would get into touch with my daughter

sometime tomorrow if I felt probably Polynesian. He noticed the direction of my gaze

and made her right hip twitch amorously. "Okey-dokey," big Frank sang out, slapped

the jamb, and whistling, carried my message away, and I went on drinking, and by

morning the fever was gone, and although I was as limp as a toad, I put on the

purple dressing gown over my maize yellow pajamas, and walked over to the office

telephone. Everything was fine. A bright voice informed me that yes, everything was

fine, my daughter had checked out the day before, around two, her uncle, Mr.

Gustave, had called for her with a cocker spaniel pup and a smile for everyone, and

a black Caddy Lack, and had paid Dolly's bill in cash, and told them to tell me I

should not worry, and keep warm, they were at Grandpa's ranch as agreed.

Elphinstone was, and I hope still is, a very cute little town. It was spread like a

maquette, you know, with its neat greenwool trees and red-roofed houses over the

valley floor and I think I have alluded earlier to its model school and temple and

spacious rectangular blocks, some of which were, curiously enough, just

unconventional pastures with a mule or a unicorn grazing in the young July morning

mist. Very amusing: at one gravel--groaning sharp turn I sideswiped a parked car

but said to myself telestically--and, telepathically (I hoped), to its gesticulating

owner--that I would return later, address Bird School, Bird, New Bird, the gin kept

my heart alive but bemazed my brain, and after some lapses and losses common to

dream sequences, I found myself in the reception room, trying to beat up the doctor,

and roaring at people under chairs, and clamoring for Mary who luckily for her was

not there; rough hands plucked at my dressing gown, ripping off a pocket, and

somehow I seem to have been sitting on a bald brown-headed patient, whom I had

mistaken for Dr. Blue, and who eventually stood up, remarking with a preposterous

accent: "Now, who is nevrotic, I ask?"--and then a gaunt unsmiling nurse presented

me with seven beautiful, beautiful books and the exquisitely folded tartan lap robe,

and demanded a receipt; and in the sudden silence I became aware of a policeman

in the hallway, to whom my fellow motorist was pointing me out, and meekly I

signed the very symbolic receipt, thus surrendering my Lolita to all those apes. But

what else could I do? One simple and stark thought stood out and this was:

"Freedom for the moment is everything." One false move--and I might have been

made to explain a life of crime. So I simulated a coming out of a daze. To my fellow

motorist I paid what he thought was fair. To Dr. Blue, who by then was stroking my

hand, I spoke in tears of the liquor I bolstered too freely a tricky but not necessarily

diseased heart with. To the hospital in general I apologized with a flourish that

almost bowled me over, adding however that I was not on particularly good terms

with the rest of the Humbert clan. To myself I whispered that I still had my gun, and

was still a free man--free to trace the fugitive, free to destroy my brother.



23

A thousand-mile stretch of silk-smooth road separated Kasbeam, where, to the best

of my belief, the red fiend had been scheduled to appear for the first time, and

fateful Elphinstone which we had reached about a week before Independence Day.

The journey had taken up most of June for we had seldom made more than a

hundred and fifty miles per traveling day, spending the rest of the time, up to five

days in one case, at various stopping places, all of them also prearranged, no doubt.

It was that stretch, then, along which the fiend's spoor should be sought; and to this

I devoted myself, after several unmentionable days of dashing up and down the

relentlessly radiating roads in the vicinity of Elphinstone. Imagine me, reader , with

my shyness, my distaste for any ostentation, my inherent sense of the comme il

faut, imagine me masking the frenzy of my grief with a trembling ingratiating smile

while devising some casual pretext to flip through the hotel register: "Oh," I would

say, "I am almost positive that I stayed here once--let me look up the entries for

mid-June--no, I see I'm wrong after all--what a very quaint name for a home town,

Kawtagain. Thanks very much." Or: "I had a customer staying here--I mislaid his

address--may I . . .?" And every once in a while, especially if the operator of the

place happened to be a certain type of gloomy male, personal inspection of the

books was denied me. I have a memo here: between July 5 and November 18, when

I returned to Beardsley for a few days, I registered, if not actually stayed, at 342

hotels, motels and tourist homes. This figure includes a few registrations between

Chestnut and Beardsley, one of which yielded a shadow of the fiend ("N. Petit,

Larousse, Ill."); I had to space and time my inquiries carefully so as not to attract

undue attention; and there must have been at least fifty places where I merely

inquired at the desk--but that was a futile quest, and I preferred building up a

foundation of verisimilitude and good will by first paying for an unneeded room. My

survey showed that of the 300 or so books inspected, at least 20 provided me with a

clue: the loitering fiend had stopped even more often than we, or else--he was quite

capable of that--he had thrown in additional registrations in order to keep me well

furnished with derisive hints. Only in one case had he actually stayed at the same

motor court as we, a few paces from Lolita's pillow. In some instances he had taken

up quarters in the same or in a neighboring block; not infrequently he had lain in

wait at an intermediate spot between two bespoken points. How vividly I recalled

Lolita, just before our departure from Beardsley, prone on the parlor rug, studying

tour books and maps, and marking laps and stops with her lipstick! I discovered at

once that he had foreseen my investigations and had planted insulting pseudonyms

for my special benefit. At the very first motel office I visited, Ponderosa Lodge, his

entry, among a dozen obviously human ones, read: Dr. Gratiano Forbeson,

Mirandola, NY. Its Italian Comedy connotations could not fail to strike me, of course.

The landlady deigned to inform me that the gentleman had been laid up for five days

with a bad cold, that he had left his car for repairs in some garage or other and that

he had checked out on the 4th of July. Yes, a girl called Ann Lore had worked

formerly at the Lodge, but was now married to a grocer in Cedar City. One moonlit

night I waylaid white-shoed Mary on a solitary street; an automaton, she was about

to shriek, but I managed to humanize her by the simple act of falling on my knees

and with pious yelps imploring her to help. She did not know a thing, she swore.

Who was this Gratiano Forbeson? She seemed to waver. I whipped out a hundred-

dollar bill. She lifted it to the light of the moon. "He is your brother," she whispered

at last. I plucked the bill out of her moon-cold hand, and spitting out a French curse

turned and ran away. This taught me to rely on myself alone. No detective could

discover the clues Trapp had tuned to my mind and manner. I could not hope, of

course, he would ever leave his correct name and address; but I did hope he might

slip on the glaze of his own subtlety, by daring, say, to introduce a richer and more

personal shot of color than strictly necessary, or by revealing too much through a

qualitative sum of quantitative parts which revealed too little. In one thing he

succeeded: he succeeded in thoroughly enmeshing me and my thrashing anguish in

his demoniacal game. With infinite skill, he swayed and staggered, and regained an

impossible balance, always leaving me with the sportive hope--if I may use such a

term in speaking of betrayal, fury, desolation, horror and hate--that he might give

himself away next time. He never did--though coming damn close to it. We all

admire the spangled acrobat with classical grace meticulously walking his tight rope

in the talcum light; but how much rarer art there is in the sagging rope expert

wearing scarecrow clothes and impersonating a grotesque drunk! I should know. The

clues he left did not establish his identity but they reflected his personality, or at

least a certain homogenous and striking personality; his genre, his type of humor--at

its best at leat--the tone of his brain, had affinities with my own. He mimed and

mocked me. His allusions were definitely highbrow. He was well-read. He knew

French. he was versed in logodaedaly and logomancy. He was an amateur of sex

lore. He had a feminine handwriting. He would change his name but he could not

disguise, no matter how he slanted them, his very peculiar t's, w's and l's.

Quelquepart Island was one of his favorite residences. He did not use a fountain pen

which fact, as any psychoanalyst will tell you, meant that the patient was a

repressed undinist. One mercifully hopes there are water nymphs in the Styx. His

main trait was his passion for tantalization. Goodness, what a tease the poor fellow

was! He challenged my scholarship. I am sufficiently proud of my knowing something

to be modest about my not knowing all; and I daresay I missed some elements in

that cryprogrammic paper chase. What a shiver of triumph and loathing shook my

frail frame when, among the plain innocent names in the hotel recorder, his fiendish

conundrum would ejaculate in my face! I noticed that whenever he felt his enigmas

were becoming too recondite, even for such a solver as I, he would lure me back

with an easy one. "Arshne Lupin" was obvious to a Frenchman who remembered the

detective stories of his youth; and one hardly had to be a Coleridgian to appreciate

the trite poke of "A. Person, Porlock, England." In horrible taste but basically

suggestive of a cultured man--not a policeman, not a common good, not a lewd

salesman--were such assumed names as "Arthur Rainbow"--plainly the travestied

author of Le Bateau Bleu--let me laugh a little too, gentlemen--and "Morris

Schmetterling," of L'Oiseau Ivre fame (touchi, reader!). The silly but funny "D.

Orgon, Elmira, NY," was from Molihre, of course, and because I had quite recently

tried to interest Lolita in a famous 18th-century play, I welcomed as an old friend

"Harry Bumper, Sheridan, Wyo." An ordinary encyclopedia informed me who the

peculiar looking "Phineas Quimby, Lebanon, NH" was; and any good Freudian, with a

German name and some interest in religious prostitution, should recognize at a

glance the implication of "Dr. Kitzler, Eryx, Miss." So far so good. That sort of fun

was shoddy but on the whole impersonal and thus innocuous. Among entries that

arrested my attention as undoubtable clues per se but baffled me in respect to their

finer points I do not care to mention many since I feel I am groping in a border-land

mist with verbal phantoms turning, perhaps, into living vacationists. Who was

"Johnny Randall, Ramble, Ohio"? Or was he a real person who just happened to write

a hand similar to "N.S. Aristoff, Catagela, NY"? What was the sting in "Catagela"?

And what about "James Mavor Morell, Hoaxton, England"? "Aristophanes," "hoax"--

fine, but what was I missing? There was one strain running through all that

pseudonymity which caused me especially painful palpitations when I came across it.

Such things as "G. Trapp, Geneva, NY." was the sign of treachery on Lolita's part.

"Aubrey Beardsley, Quelquepart Island" suggested more lucidly than the garbled

telephone message had that the starting point of the affair should be looked for in

the East. "Lucas Picador, Merrymay, Pa." insinuated that my Carmen had betrayed

my pathetic endearments to the impostor. Horribly cruel, forsooth, was "Will Brown,

Dolores, Colo." The gruesome "Harold Haze, Tombstone, Arizona" (which at another

time would have appealed to my sense of humor) implied a familiarity with the girl's

past that in nightmare fashion suggested for a moment that my quarry was an old

friend of the family, maybe an old flame of Charlotte's, maybe a redresser of wrongs

("Donald Quix, Sierra, Nev."). But the most penetrating bodkin was the

anagramtailed entry in the register of Chestnut Lodge "Ted Hunter, Cane, NH." The

garbled license numbers left by all these Persons and Orgons and Morells and Trapps

only told me that motel keepers omit to check if guests' cars are accurately listed.

References--incompletely or incorrectly indicated--to the cars the fiend had hired for

short laps between Wace and Elphinstone were of course useless; the license of the

initial Aztec was a shimmer of shifting numerals, some transposed, others altered or

omitted, but somehow forming interrelated combinations (such as "WS 1564" and

"SH 1616," and "Q32888" or "CU88322") which however were so cunningly contrived

as to never reveal a common denominator. It occurred to me that after he had

turned that convertible over to accomplices at Wace and switched to the stage-motor

car system, his successors might have been less careful and might have inscribed at

some hotel office the archtype of those interrelated figures. But if looking for the

fiend along a road I knew he had taken was such a complicated vague and

unprofitable business, what could I expect from any attempt to trace unknown

motorists traveling along unknown routes?



24

By the time I reached Beardsley, in the course of the harrowing recapitulation I have

now discussed at sufficient length, a complete image had formed in my mind; and

through the--always risky--process of elimination I had reduced this image to the

only concrete source that morbid cerebration and torpid memory could give it.

Except for the Rev. Rigor Mortis (as the girls called him), and an old gentleman who

taught non-obligatory German and Latin, there were no regular male teachers t

Beardsley School. But on two occasions an art instructor on the Beardsley College

faculty had come over to show the schoolgirls magic lantern pictures of French

castles and nineteenth-century paintings. I had wanted to attend those projections

and talks, but Dolly, as was her wont, had asked me not to, period. I also

remembered that Gaston had referred to that particular lecturer as a brilliant

gargon; but that was all; memory refused to supply me with the name of the

chateau-lover. On the day fixed for the execution, I walked though the sleet across

the campus to the information desk in Maker Hall, Beardsley College. There I learned

that the fellow's name was Riggs (rather like that of the minister), that he was a

bachelor, and that in ten minutes he would issue from the "Museum" where he was

having a class. In the passage leading to the auditorium I sat on a marble bench of

sorts donated by Cecilia Dalrymple Ramble. As I waited there, in the prostatic

discomfort, drunk, sleep-starved, with my gun in my fist in my raincoat pocket, it

suddenly occurred to me that I was demented and was about to do something

stupid. There was not one chance in a million that Albert Riggs, Ass. Prof., was

hiding my Lolita at his Beardsley home, 24 Pritchard Road. He could not be the

villain. It was absolutely preposterous. I was losing my time and my wits. He and

she were in California and not here at all. Presently, I noticed a vague commotion

behind some white statues; a door-not the one I had been staring at--opened

briskly, and amid a bevy of women students a baldish head and two bright brown

eyes bobbed, advanced. He was a total stranger to me but insisted we had met at a

lawn party at Beardsley School. How was my delightful tennis-playing daughter? He

had another class. He would be seeing me. Another attempt at identification was less

speedily resolved: through an advertisement in one of Lo's magazines I dared to get

in touch with a private detective, an ex-pugilist, and merely to give him some idea of

the method adopted by the fiend, I acquainted him with the kind of names and

addresses I had collected. He demanded a goodish deposit and for two years--two

years, reader!--that imbecile busied himself with checking those nonsense data. I

had long severed all monetary relations with him when he turned up one day with

the triumphant information that an eighty-year-old Indian by the name of Bill Brown

lived near Dolores, Colo.



25

This book is about Lolita; and now that I have reached the part which (had I not

been forestalled by another internal combustion martyr) might be called "Dolorhs

Disparue," there would be little sense in analyzing the three empty years that

followed. While a few pertinent points have to be marked, the general impression I

desire to convey is of a side door crashing open in life's full flight, and a rush of

roaring black time drowning with its whipping wind the cry of lone disaster.

Singularly enough, I seldom if ever dreamed of Lolita as I remembered her--as I saw

her constantly and obsessively in my conscious mind during my daymares and

insomnias. More precisely: she did haunt my sleep but she appeared there in strange

and ludicrous disguises as Valeria or Charlotte, or a cross between them. That

complex ghost would come to me, shedding shift after shift, in an atmosphere of

great melancholy and disgust, and would recline in dull invitation on some narrow

board or hard settee, with flesh ajar like the rubber valve of a soccer ball's bladder. I

would bind myself, dentures fractured or hopelessly mislaid, in horrible chambres

garnies where I would be entertained at tedious vivisecting parties that generally

ended with Charlotte or Valeria weeping in my bleeding arms and being tenderly

kissed by my brotherly lips in a dream disorder of auctioneered Viennese bric-yu-

brac, pity, impotence and the brown wigs of tragic old women who had just been

gassed. One day I removed from the car and destroyed an accumulation of teen-

magazines. You know the sort. Stone age at heart; up to date, or at least

Mycenaean, as to hygiene. A handsome, very ripe actress with huge lashes and a

pulpy red underlip, endorsing a shampoo. Ads and fads. Young scholars dote on

plenty of pleats--que c'itait loin, tout cela! It is your hostess' duty to provide robes.

Unattached details take all the sparkle out of your conversation. All of us have known

"pickers"--one who picks her cuticle at the office party. Unless he is very elderly or

very important, a man should remove his gloves before shaking hands with a

woman. Invite Romance by wearing the Exciting New Tummy Flattener. Trims tums,

nips hips. Tristram in Movielove. Yessir! The Joe-Roe marital enigma is making yaps

flap. Glamorize yourself quickly and inexpensively. Comics. Bad girl dark hair fat

father cigar; good girl red hair handsome daddums clipped mustache. Or that

repulsive strip with the big gagoon and his wife, a kiddoid gnomide. Et moi qui

t'offrais mon genie . . . I recalled the rather charming nonsense verse I used to write

her when she was a child: "nonsense," she used to say mockingly, "is correct." The

Squirl and his Squirrel, the Rabs and their Rabbits Have certain obscure and peculiar

habits. Male hummingbirds make the most exquisite rockets. The snake when he

walks holds his hands in his pockets. . . Other things of hers were harder to

relinquish. Up to the end of 1949, I cherished and adored, and stained with my

kisses and merman tears, a pair of old sneakers, a boy's shirt she had worn, some

ancient blue jeans I found in the trunk compartment, a crumpled school cap,

suchlike wanton treasures. Then, when I understood my mind was cracking, I

collected those sundry belongings, added to them what had been stored in

Beardsley--a box of books, her bicycle, old coats, galoshes--and on her fifteenth

birthday mailed everything as an anonymous gift to a home for orphaned girls on a

windy lake, on the Canadian border. It is just possible that had I gone to a strong

hypnotist he might have extracted from me and arrayed in a logical pattern certain

chance memories that I have threaded through my book with considerably more

ostentation than they present themselves with to my mind even now when I know

what to seek in the past. At the time I felt I was merely losing contact with reality;

and after spending the rest of the winter and most of the following spring in a

Quebec sanatorium where I had stayed before, I resolved first to settle some affairs

of mine in New York and then to proceed to California for a thorough search there.

Here is something I composed in my retreat: Wanted, wanted: Dolores Haze. Hair:

brown. Lips: scarlet. Age: five thousand three hundred days. Profession: none, or

"starlet." Where are you hiding, Dolores Haze? Why are you hiding, darling? (I talk in

a daze, I walk in a maze, I cannot get out, said the starling). Where are you riding,

Dolores Haze? What make is the magic carpet? Is a Cream Cougar the present

craze? And where are you parked, my car pet? Who is your hero, Dolores Haze? Still

one of those blue-caped star-men? Oh the balmy days and the palmy bays, And the

cars, and the bars, my Carmen! Oh Dolores, that juke-box hurts! Are you still

dancin', darlin'? (Both in worn levis, both in torn T-shirts, And I, in my corner,

snarlin'). Happy, happy is gnarled McFate Touring the States with a child wife,

Plowing his Molly in every State Among the protected wild life. My Dolly, my folly!

Her eyes were vair, And never closed when I kissed her. Know an old perfume called

Soleil Vert? Are you from Paris, mister? L'autre soir un air froid d'opira m'alita: Son

fili--bien fol est qui s'y fie! Il neige, le dicor s'icroule, Lolita! Lolita, qu'ai-je fait de ta

vie? Dying, dying, Lolita Haze, Of hate and remorse, I'm dying. And again my hairy

fist I raise, And again I hear you crying. Officer, officer, there they go-- In the rain,

where that lighted store is! And her socks are white, and I love her so, And her name

is Haze, Dolores. Officer, officer, there they are-- Dolores Haze and her lover! Whip

out your gun and follow that car. Now tumble out, and take cover. Wanted, wanted:

Dolores Haze. Her dream-gray gaze never flinches. Ninety pounds is all she weighs

With a height of sixty inches. My car is limping, Dolores Haze, And the last long lap is

the hardest, And I shall be dumped where the weed decays, And the rest is rust and

stardust. By psychoanalyzing this poem, I notice it is really a maniac's masterpiece.

The stark, stiff, lurid rhymes correspond very exactly to certain perspectiveless and

terrible landscapes and figures, and magnified parts of landscapes and figures, as

drawn by psychopaths in tests devised by their astute trainers. I wrote many more

poems. I immersed myself in the poetry of others. But not for a second did I forget

the load of revenge. I would be a knave to say, and the reader a fool to believe, that

the shock of losing Lolita cured me of pederosis. My accursed nature could not

change, no matter how my love for her did. On playgrounds and beaches, my sullen

and stealthy eye, against my will, still sought out the flash of a nymphet's limbs, the

sly tokens of Lolita's handmaids and rosegirls. But one essential vision in me had

withered: never did I dwell now on possibilities of bliss with a little maiden, specific

or synthetic, in some out-of-the-way place; never did my fancy sink its fangs into

Lolita's sisters, far far away, in the coves of evoked islands. That was all over, for the

time being at least. On the other hand, alas, two years of monstrous indulgence had

left me with certain habits of lust: I feared lest the void I lived in might drive me to

plunge into the freedom of sudden insanity when confronted with a chance

temptation in some lane between school and supper. Solitude was corrupting me. I

needed company and care. My heart was a hysterical unreliable organ. This is how

Rita enters the picture.



26

She was twice Lolita's age and three quarters of mine: a very slight, dark-haired,

pale-skinned adult, weighing a hundred and five pounds, with charmingly

asymmetrical eyes, and angular, rapidly sketched profile, and a most appealing

ensellure to her supple back--I think she had some Spanish or Babylonian blood. I

picked her up one depraved May evening somewhere between Montreal and New

York, or more narrowly, between Toylestown and Blake, at a darkishly burning bar

under the sign of the Tigermoth, where she was amiably drunk: she insisted we had

gone to school together, and she placed her trembling little hand on my ape paw. My

senses were very slightly stirred but I decided to give her a try; I did--and adopted

her as a constant companion. She was so kind, was Rita, such a good sport, that I

daresay she would have given herself to any pathetic creature or fallacy, an old

broken tree or a bereaved porcupine, out of sheer chumminess and compassion.

When I first met her she had but recently divorced her third husband--and a little

more recently had been abandoned by her seventh cavalier servant--the others, the

mutables, were too numerous and mobile to tabulate. Her brother was--and no

doubt still is--a prominent, pasty-faced, suspenders-and-painted-tie-wearing

politician, mayor and booster of his ball-playing, Bible-reading, grain-handling home

town. For the last eight years he had been paying his great little sister several

hundred dollars per month under the stringent condition that she would never never

enter great little Grainball City. She told me, with wails of wonder, that for some

God-damn reason every new boy friend of hers would first of all take her Grainball-

ward: it was a fatal attraction; and before she knew what was what, she would find

herself sucked into the lunar orbit of the town, and would be following the flood-lit

drive that encircled it--"going round and round," as she phrased it, "like a God-damn

mulberry moth." She had a natty little coupi; and in it we traveled to California so as

to give my venerable vehicle a rest. her natural speed was ninety. Dear Rita! We

cruised together for two dim years, from summer 1950 to summer 1952, and she

was the sweetest, simplest, gentles, dumbest Rita imaginable. In comparison to her,

Valechka was a Schlegel, and Charlotte a Hegel. There is no earthly reason why I

should dally with her in the margin of this sinister memoir, but let me say (hi, Rita--

wherever you are, drunk or hangoverish, Rita, hi!) that she was the most soothing,

the most comprehending companion that I ever had, and certainly saved me from

the madhouse. I told her I was trying to trace a girl and plug that girl's bully. Rita

solemnly approved of the plan--and in the course of some investigation she

undertook on her own (without really knowing a thing), around San Humbertino, got

entangled with a pretty awful crook herself; I had the devil of a time retrieving her--

used and bruised but still cocky. Then one day she proposed playing Russian roulette

with my sacred automatic; I said you couldn't, it was not a revolver, and we

struggled for it, until at last it went off, touching off a very thin and very comical

spurt of hot water from the hole it made in the wall of the cabin room; I remember

her shrieks of laughter. The oddly prepubescent curve of her back, her ricey skin, her

slow languorous columbine kisses kept me from mischief. It is not the artistic

aptitudes that are secondary sexual characters as some shams and shamans have

said; it is the other way around: sex is but the ancilla of art. One rather mysterious

spree that had interesting repercussions I must notice. I had abandoned the search:

the fiend was either in Tartary or burning away in my cerebellum (the flames fanned

by my fancy and grief) but certainly not having Dolores Haze play champion tennis

on the Pacific Coast. One afternoon, on our way back East, in a hideous hotel, the

kind where they hold conventions and where labeled, fat, pink men stagger around,

all first names and business and booze--dear Rita and I awoke to find a third in our

room, a blond, almost albino, young fellow with white eyelashes and large

transparent ears, whom neither Rita nor I recalled having ever seen in our sad lives.

Sweating in thick dirty underwear, and with old army boots on, he lay snoring on the

double bed beyond my chaste Rita. One of his front teeth was gone, amber pustules

grew on his forehead. Ritochka enveloped her sinuous nudity in my raincoat--the

first thing at hand; I slipped on a pair of candy-striped drawers; and we took stock of

the situation. Five glasses had been used, which in the way of clues, was an

embarrassment of riches. The door was not properly closed. A sweater and a pair of

shapeless tan pants lay on the floor. We shook their owner into miserable

consciousness. He was completely amnesic. In an accent that Rita recognized as

pure Brooklynese, he peevishly insinuated that somehow we had purloined his

(worthless) identity. We rushed him into his clothes and left him at the nearest

hospital, realizing on the way that somehow or other after forgotten gyrations, we

ewer in Grainball. Half a year later Rita wrote the doctor for news. Jack Humbertson

as he had been tastelessly dubbed was still isolated from his personal past. Oh

Mnemosyne, sweetest and most mischievous of muses! I would not have mentioned

this incident had it not started a chain of ideas that resulted in my publishing in the

Cantrip Review an essay on "Mimir and Memory," in which I suggested among other

things that seemed original and important to that splendid review's benevolent

readers, a theory of perceptual time based on the circulation of the blood and

conceptually depending (to fill up this nutshell) on the mind's being conscious not

only of matter but also of its own self, thus crating a continuous spanning of two

points (the storable future and the stored past). In result of this venture--and in

culmination of the impression made by my previous travaux--I was called from New

York, where Rita and I were living in a little flat with a view of gleaming children

taking shower baths far below in a fountainous arbor of Central Park, to Cantrip

College, four hundred miles away, for one year. I lodged there, in special apartments

for poets and philosophers, from September 1951 to June 1952, while Rita whom I

preferred not to display vegetated--somewhat indecorously, I am afraid--in a

roadside inn where I visited her twice a week. Then she vanished--more humanly

than her predecessor had done: a month later I found her in the local jail. She was

trhs digne, had had her appendix removed, and managed to convince me that the

beautiful bluish furs she had been accused of stealing from a Mrs. Roland MacCrum

had really been a spontaneous, if somewhat alcoholic, gift from Roland himself. I

succeeded in getting her out without appealing to her touchy brother, and soon

afterwards we drove back to Central Park West, by way of Briceland, where we had

stopped for a few hours the year before. A curious urge to relive my stay there with

Lolita had got hold of me. I was entering a phase of existence where I had given up

all hope of tracing her kidnapper and her. I now attempted to fall back on old

settings in order to save what still could be saved in the way of souvenir, souvenir

que me veux-tu? Autumn was ringing in the air. To a post card requesting twin beds

Professor Hamburg got a prompt expression of regret in reply. They were full up.

They had one bathless basement room with four beds which they thought I would

not want. Their note paper was headed: The Enchanted Hunters Near Churches No

Dogs All legal beverages I wondered if the last statement was true. All? Did they

have for instance sidewalk grenadine? I also wondered if a hunter, enchanted or

otherwise, would not need a pointer more than a pew, and with a spasm of pain I

recalled a scene worthy of a great artist: petite nymphe accroupie; but that silky

cocker spaniel had perhaps been a baptized one. No--I felt I could not endure the

throes of revisiting that lobby. There was a much better possibility of retrievable time

elsewhere in soft, rich-colored, autumnal Briceland. Leaving Rita in a bar, I made for

the town library. A twittering spinster was only too glad to help me disinter mid-

August 1947 from the bound Briceland Gazette, and presently, in a secluded nook

under a naked light, I was turning the enormous and fragile pages of a coffin-black

volume almost as big as Lolita. Reader! Bruder! What a foolish Hamburg that

Hamburg was! Since his supersensitive system was loath to face the actual scene, he

thought he could at least enjoy a secret part of it--which reminds one of the tenth or

twentieth soldier in the raping queue who throws the girl's black shawl over her

white face so as not to see those impossible eyes while taking his military pleasure in

the sad, sacked village. What I lusted to get was the printed picture that had

chanced to absorb my trespassing image while the Gazette's photographer was

concentrating on Dr. Braddock and his group. Passionately I hoped to find preserved

the portrait of the artist as a younger brute. An innocent camera catching me on my

dark way to Lolita's bed--what a magnet for Mnemosyne! I cannot well explain the

true nature of that urge of mine. It was allied, I suppose, to that swooning curiosity

which impels one to examine with a magnifying glass bleak little figures--still life

practically, and everybody about to throw up--at an early morning execution, and

the patient's expression impossible to make out in the print. Anyway, I was literally

gasping for breath, and one corner of the book of doom kept stabbing me in the

stomach while I scanned and skimmed . . . Brute Force and Possessed were coming

on Sunday, the 24th, to both theatres. Mr. Purdom, independent tobacco auctioneer,

said that ever since 1925 he had been an Omen Faustum smoker. Husky Hank and

his petite bride were to be the guests of Mr. and Mrs. Reginald G. Gore, 58 Inchkeith

Ave. The size of certain parasites is one sixth of the host. Dunkerque was fortified in

the tenth century. Misses' socks, 39 c. Saddle Oxfords 3.98. Wine, wine, wine,

quipped the author of Dark Age who refused to be photographed, may suit a Persian

bubble bird, but I say give me rain, rain, rain on the shingle roof for roses and

inspiration every time. Dimples are caused by the adherence of the skin to the

deeper tissues. Greeks repulse a heavy guerrilla assault--and, ah, at last, a little

figure in white, and Dr. Braddock in black, but whatever spectral shoulder was

brushing against his ample form--nothing of myself could I make out. I went to find

Rita who introduced me with her vin triste smile to a pocket-sized wizened

truculently tight old man saying this was--what was the name again, son?--a former

schoolmate of hers. He tried to retain her, and in the slight scuffle that followed I

hurt my thumb against his hard head. In the silent painted part where I walked her

and aired her a little, she sobbed and said I would soon, soon leave her as

everybody had, and I sang her a wistful French ballad, and strung together some

fugitive rhymes to amuse her: The place was called Enchanted Hunters. Query: What

Indian dyes, Diana, did thy dell endorses to make of Picture Lake a very blood bath

of trees before the blue hotel? She said: "Why blue when it is white, why blue for

heaven's sake?" and started to cry again, and I marched her to the car, and we

drove on to New York, and soon she was reasonably happy again high up in the haze

on the little terrace of our flat. I notice I have somehow mixed up two events, my

visit with Rita to Briceland on our way to Carntrip, and our passing through Briceland

again on our way back to New York, but such suffusions of swimming colors are not

to be disdained by the artist in recollection.



27

My letterbox in the entrance hall belonged to the type that allows one to glimpse

something of its contents through a glassed slit. Several times already, a trick of

harlequin light that fell through the glass upon an alien handwriting had twisted it

into a semblance of Lolita's script causing me almost to collapse as I leant against an

adjacent urn, almost my own. Whenever that happened--whenever her lovely,

childish scrawl was horribly transformed into the dull hand of one of my few

correspondents--I used to recollect, with anguished amusement, the times in my

trustful, pre-dolorian past when I would be misled by a jewel-bright window opposite

wherein my lurking eye, the ever alert periscope of my shameful vice, would make

out from afar a half-naked nymphet stilled in the act of combing her Alice-in-

Wonderland hair. There was in the fiery phantasm a perfection which made my wild

delight also perfect, just because the vision was out of reach, with no possibility of

attainment to spoil it by the awareness of an appended taboo; indeed, it may well be

that the very attraction immaturity has for me lies not so much in the limpidity of

pure young forbidden fairy child beauty as in the security of a situation where infinite

perfections fill the gap between the little given and the great promised--the great

rosegray never-to-be-had. Mes fenjtres! Hanging above blotched sunset and welling

night, grinding my teeth, I would crowd all the demons of my desire against the

railing of a throbbing balcony: it would be ready to take off in the apricot and black

humid evening; did take off--whereupon the lighted image would move and Even

would revert to a rib, and there would be nothing in the window but an obese partly

clad man reading the paper. Since I sometimes won the race between my fancy and

nature's reality, the deception was bearable. Unbearable pain began when chance

entered the fray and deprived me of the smile meant for me. "Savez-vous qu'yu dix

ans ma petite itait folle de vous?" said a woman I talked to at a tea in Paris, and the

petite had just married, miles away, and I could not even remember if I had ever

noticed her in that garden, next to those tennis courts, a dozen years before. And

now likewise, the radiant foreglimpse, the promise of reality, a promise not only to

be simulated seductively but also to be nobly held--all this, chance denied me--

chance and a change to smaller characters on the pale beloved writer's part. My

fancy was both Proustianized and Procrusteanized; for that particular morning, late

in September 1952, as I had come down to grope for my mail, the dapper and

bilious janitor with whom I was on execrable terms started to complain that a man

who had seen Rita home recently had been "sick like a dog" on the front steps. In

the process of listening to him and tipping him, and then listening to a revised and

politer version of the incident, I had the impression that one of the two letters which

that blessed mail brought was from Rita's mother, a crazy little woman, whom we

had once visited on Cape Cod and who kept writing me to my various addresses,

saying how wonderfully well matched her daughter and I were, and how wonderful it

would be if we married; the other letter which I opened and scanned rapidly in the

elevator was from John Farlow. I have often noticed that we are inclined to endow

our friends with the stability of type that literary characters acquire in the reader's

mind. No matter how many times we reopen "King Lear," never shall we find the

good king banging his tankard in high revelry, all woes forgotten, at a jolly reunion

with all three daughters and their lapdogs. Never will Emma rally, revived by the

sympathetic salts in Flaubert's father's timely tear. Whatever evolution this or that

popular character has gone through between the book covers, his fate is fixed in our

minds, and, similarly, we expect our friends to follow this or that logical and

conventional pattern we have fixed for them. Thus X will never compose the

immortal music that would clash with the second-rate symphonies he has

accustomed us to. Y will never commit murder. Under no circumstances can Z ever

betray us. We have it all arranged in our minds, and the less often we see a

particular person the more satisfying it is to check how obediently he conforms to

our notion of him every time we hear of him. Any deviation in the fates we have

ordained would strike us as not only anomalous but unethical. We would prefer not

to have known at all our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator, if it turns out

he has just produced the greatest book of poetry his age has seen. I am saying all

this in order to explain how bewildered I was by Farlow's hysterical letter. I knew his

wife had died but I certainly expected him to remain, throughout a devout

widowhood, the dull, sedate and reliable person he had always been. Now he wrote

that after a brief visit to the U.S. he had returned to South America and had decided

that whatever affairs he had controlled at Ramsdale he would hand over to Jack

Windmuller of that town, a lawyer whom we both knew. He seemed particularly

relieved to get rid of the Haze "complications." He had married a Spanish girl. He

had stopped smoking and had gained thirty pounds. She was very young and a ski

champion. They were going to India for their honeymonsoon. Since he was "building

a family" as he put it, he would have no time henceforth for my affairs which he

termed "very strange and very aggravating." Busybodies--a whole committee of

them, it appeared--had informed him that the whereabouts of little Dolly Haze were

unknown, and that I was living with a notorious divorcee in California. His father-in-

law was a count, and exceedingly wealthy. The people who had been renting the

Haze house for some years now wished to buy it. He suggested that I better produce

Dolly quick. he had broken his leg. He enclosed a snapshot of himself and a brunette

in white wool beaming at each other among the snows of Chile. I remember letting

myself into my flat and starting to say: Well, at least we shall now track them down-

-when the other letter began talking to me in a small matter-of-fact voice: Dear

Dad: How's everything? I'm married. I'm going to have a baby. I guess he's going to

be a big one. I guess he'll come right for Christmas. This is a hard letter to write. I'm

going nuts because we don't have enough to pay our debts and get out of here. Dick

is promised a big job in Alaska in his very specialized corner of the mechanical field,

that's all I know about it but it's really grand. Pardon me for withholding our home

address but you may still be mad at me, and Dick must not know. This town is

something. You can't see the morons for the smog. Please do send us a check, Dad.

We could manage with three or four hundred or even less, anything is welcome, you

might sell my old things, because once we go there the dough will just start rolling

in. Writ, please. I have gone through much sadness and hardship. Yours expecting,

Dolly (Mrs. Richard F. Schiller)



28

I was again on the road, again at the wheel of the old blue sedan, again alone. Rita

had still been dead to the world when I read that letter and fought the mountains of

agony it raised within me. I had glanced at her as she smiled in her sleep and had

kissed her on her moist brow, and had left her forever, with a note of tender adieu

which I taped to her navel--otherwise she might not have found it. "Alone" did I say?

Pas tout yu fait. I had my little black chum with me, and as soon as I reached a

secluded spot, I rehearsed Mr. Richard F. Schiller's violent death. I had found a very

old and very dirty gray sweater of mine in the back of the car, and this I hung up on

a branch, in a speechless glade, which I had reached by a wood road from the now

remote highway. The carrying out of the sentence was a little marred by what

seemed to me a certain stiffness in the play of the trigger, and I wondered if I should

get some oil for the mysterious thing but decided I had no time to spare. Back into

the car went the old dead sweater, now with additional perforations, and having

reloaded warm Chum, I continued my journey. The letter was dated September 18,

1952 (this was September 22), and the address she gave was "General Delivery,

Coalmont" (not "Va.," not "Pa.," not "Tenn."--and not Coalmont, anyway--I have

camouflaged everything, my love). Inquiries showed this to be a small industrial

community some eight hundred miles from New York City. At first I planned to drive

all day and all night, but then thought better of it and rested for a couple of hours

around dawn in a motor court room, a few miles before reaching the town. I had

made up my mind that the fiend, this Schiller, had been a car salesman who had

perhaps got to know my Lolita by giving her a ride in Beardsley--the day her bike

blew a tire on the way to Miss Emperor--and that he had got into some trouble since

then. The corpse of the executed sweater, no matter how I changed its contours as it

lay on the back seat of the car, had kept revealing various outlines pertaining to

Trapp-Schiller--the grossness and obscene bonhomie of his body, and to counteract

this taste of coarse corruption I resolved to make myself especially handsome and

smart as I pressed home the nipple of my alarm clock before it exploded at the set

hour of six a.m. Then, with the stern and romantic care of a gentleman about to fight

a duel, I checked the arrangement of my papers, bathed and perfumed my delicate

body, shaved my face and chest, selected a silk shirt and clean drawers, pulled on

transparent taupe socks, and congratulated myself for having with me in my trunk

some very exquisite clothes--a waistcoat with nacreous buttons, for instance, a pale

cashmere tie and so on. I was not able, alas, to hold my breakfast, but dismissed

that physicality as a trivial contretemps, wiped my mouth with a gossamer

handkerchief produced from my sleeve, and, with a blue block of ice for heart, a pill

on my tongue and solid death in my hip pocket, I stepped neatly into a telephone

booth in Coalmont (Ah-ah-ah, said its little door) and rang up the only Schiller--Paul,

Furniture--to be found in the battered book. Hoarse Paul told me he did know a

Richard, the son of a cousin of his, and his address was, let me see, 10 Killer Street

(I am not going very far for my pseudonyms). Ah-ah-ah, said the little door. At 10

Killer Street, a tenement house, I interviewed a number of dejected old people and

two long-haired strawberry-blond incredibly grubby nymphets (rather abstractly, just

for the heck of it, the ancient beast in me was casting about for some lightly clad

child I might hold against me for a minute, after the killing was over and nothing

mattered any more, and everything was allowed). Yes, Dick Skiller had lived there,

but had moved when he married. Nobody knew his address. "They might know at

the store," said a bass voice from an open manhole near which I happened to be

standing with the two thin-armed, barefoot little girls and their dim grandmothers. I

entered the wrong store and a wary old Negro shook his head even before I could

ask anything. I crossed over to a bleak grocery and there, summoned by a customer

at my request, a woman's voice from some wooden abyss in the floor, the manhole's

counterpart, cried out: Hunter Road, last house. Hunter Road was miles away, in an

even more dismal district, all dump and ditch, and wormy vegetable garden, and

shack, and gray drizzle, and red mud, and several smoking stacks in the distance. I

stopped at the last "house"--a clapboard shack, with two or three similar ones

farther away from the road and a waste of withered weeds all around. Sounds of

hammering came from behind the house, and for several minutes I sat quite still in

my old car, old and frail, at the end of my journey, at my gray goal, finis, my friends,

finis, my friends. The time was around two. My pulse was 40 one minute and 100 the

next. The drizzle crepitated against the hood of the car. My gun had migrated to my

right trouser pocket. A nondescript cur came out from behind the house, stopped in

surprise, and started good-naturedly woof-woofing at me, his eyes slit, his shaggy

belly all muddy, and then walked about a little and woofed once more.



29

I got out of the car and slammed its door. How matter-of-fact, how square that slam

sounded in the void of the sunless day! Woof, commented the dog perfunctorily. I

pressed the bell button, it vibrated through my whole system. Personne. Je resonne.

Repersonne. From what depth this re-nonsense? Woof, said the dog. A rush and a

shuffle, and woosh-woof went the door. Couple of inches taller. Pink-rimmed glasses.

New, heaped-up hairdo, new ears. How simple! The moment, the death I had kept

conjuring up for three years was as simple as a bit of dry wood. She was frankly and

hugely pregnant. Her head looked smaller (only two seconds had passed really, but

let me give them as much wooden duration as life can stand), and her pale-freckled

cheeks were hollowed, and her bare shins and arms had lost all their tan, so that the

little hairs showed. She wore a brown, sleeveless cotton dress and sloppy felt

slippers. "We--e--ell!" she exhaled after a pause with all the emphasis of wonder and

welcome. "Husband at home?" I croaked, fist in pocket. I could not kill her, of

course, as some have thought. You see, I loved her. It was love at first sight, at last

sight, at ever and ever sight. "Come in," she said with a vehement cheerful note.

Against the splintery deadwood of the door, Dolly Schiller flattened herself as best

she could (even rising on tiptoe a little) to let me pass, and was crucified for a

moment, looking down, smiling down at the threshold, hollow-cheeked with round

pommettes, her watered-milk-white arms outspread on the wood. I passed without

touching her bulging babe. Dolly-smell, with a faint fried addition. My teeth chattered

like an idiot's. "No, you stay out" (to the dog). She closed the door and followed me

and her belly into the dollhouse parlor. "Dick's down there," she said pointing with an

invisible tennis racket, inviting my gaze to travel from the drab parlor-bedroom

where we stood, right across the kitchen, and through the back doorway where, in a

rather primitive vista, a dark-haired young stranger in overalls, instantaneously

reprieved, was perched with his back to me on a ladder fixing something near or

upon the shack of his neighbor, a plumper fellow with only one arm, who stood

looking up. This pattern she explained from afar, apologetically ("Men will be men");

should she call him in? No. Standing in the middle of the slanting room and emitting

questioning "hm's," she made familiar Javanese gestures with her wrists and hands,

offering me, in a brief display of humorous courtesy, to choose between a rocker and

the divan (their bed after ten p.m.). I say "familiar" because one day she had

welcomed me with the same wrist dance to her party in Beardsley. We both sat

down on the divan. Curious: although actually her looks had faded, I definitely

realized, so hopelessly late in the day, how much she looked--had always looked--

like Botticelli's russet Venus--the same soft nose, the same blurred beauty. In my

pocket my fingers gently let go and repacked a little at the tip, within the

handkerchief it was nested in, my unused weapon. "that's not the fellow I want," I

said. The diffuse look of welcome left her eyes. Her forehead puckered as in the old

bitter days: "Not who?" "Where is he? Quick!" "Look," she said, inclining her head to

one side and shaking it in that position. "Look, you are not going to bring that up." "I

certainly am," I said, and for a moment--strangely enough the only merciful,

endurable one in the whole interview--we were bristling at each other as if she were

still mine. A wise girl, she controlled herself. Dick did not know a thing of the whole

mess. He thought I was her father. He thought she had run away from an upper-

class home just to wash dishes in a diner. He believed anything. Why should I want

to make things harder than they were by raking up all that muck? But, I said, she

must be sensible, she must be a sensible girl (with her bare drum under that thin

brown stuff), she must understand that if she expected the help I had come to give,

I must have at least a clear comprehension of the situation. "Come, his name!" She

thought I had guessed long ago. It was (with a mischievous and melancholy smile)

such a sensational name. I would never believe it. She could hardly believe it herself.

His name, my fall nymph. It was so unimportant, she said. She suggested I skip it.

Would I like a cigarette? No. His name. She shook her head with great resolution.

She guessed it was too late to raise hell and I would never believe the unbelievably

unbelievable-- I said I had better go, regards, nice to have seen her. She said really

it was useless, she would never tell, but on the other hand, after all--"Do you really

want to know who it was? Well, it was--" And softly, confidentially, arching her thin

eyebrows and puckering her parched lips, she emitted, a little mockingly, somewhat

fastidiously, not untenderly, in a kind of muted whistle, the name that the astute

reader has guessed long ago. Waterproof. Why did a flash from Hourglass Lake cross

my consciousness? I, too, had known it, without knowing it, all along. There was no

shock, no surprise. Quietly the fusion took place, and everything fell into order, into

the pattern of branches that I have woven throughout this memoir with the express

purpose of having the ripe fruit fall at the right moment; yes, with the express and

perverse purpose of rendering--she was talking but I sat melting in my golden

peace--of rendering that golden and monstrous peace through the satisfaction of

logical recognition, which my most inimical reader should experience now. She was,

as I say, talking. It now came in a relaxed flow. He was the only man she had ever

been crazy about. What about Dick? Oh, Dick was a lamb, they were quite happy

together, but she meant something different. And I had never counted, of course?

She considered me as if grasping all at once the incredible--and somehow tedious,

confusing and unnecessary--fact that the distant, elegant, slender, forty-year-old

valetudinarian in velvet coat sitting beside her had known and adored every pore and

follicle of her pubescent body. In her washed-out gray eyes, strangely spectacled,

our poor romance was for a moment reflected, pondered upon, and dismissed like a

dull party, like a rainy picnic to which only the dullest bores had come, like a

humdrum exercise, like a bit of dry mud caking her childhood. I just managed to jerk

my knee out of the range of a sketchy tap--one of her acquired gestures. She asked

me not to be dense. The past was the past. I had been a good father, she guessed--

granting me that. Proceed, Dolly Schiller. Well, did I know that he had known her

mother? That he was practically an old friend? That he had visited with his uncle in

Ramsdale?--oh, years ago--and spoken at Mother's club, and had tugged and pulled

her, Dolly, by her bare arm onto his lap in front of everybody, and kissed her face,

she was ten and furious with him? Did I know he had seen me and her at the inn

where he was writing the very play she was to rehearse in Beardsley, two years

later? Did I know--It had been horrid of her to sidetrack me into believing that Clare

was an old female, maybe a relative of his or a sometime lifemate--and oh, what a

close shave it had been when the Wace Journal carried his picture. The Briceland

Gazette had not. Yes, very amusing. Yes, she said, this world was just one gag after

another, if somebody wrote up her life nobody would ever believe it. At this point,

there came brisk homey sounds from the kitchen into which Dick and Bill had

lumbered in quest of beer. Through the doorway they noticed the visitor, and Dick

entered the parlor. "Dick, this is my Dad!" cried Dolly in a resounding violent voice

that struck me as a totally strange, and new, and cheerful, and old, and sad,

because the young fellow, veteran of a remote war, was hard of hearing. Arctic blue

eyes, black hair, ruddy cheeks, unshaven chin. We shook hands. Discreet Bill, who

evidently took pride in working wonders with one hand, brought in the beer cans he

had opened. Wanted to withdraw. The exquisite courtesy of simple folks. Was made

to stay. A beer ad. In point of fact, I preferred it that way, and so did the Schillers. I

switched to the jittery rocker. Avidly munching, Dilly plied me with marshmallows

and potato chips. The men looked at her fragile, frileux, diminutive, old-world,

youngish but sickly, father in velvet coat and beige vest, maybe a viscount. They

were under the impression I had come to stay, and Dick with a great wrinkling of

brows that denoted difficult thought, suggested Dolly and he might sleep in the

kitchen on a spare mattress. I waved a light hand and told Dolly who transmitted it

by means of a special shout to Dick that I had merely dropped in on my way to

Readsburg where I was to be entertained by some friends and admirers. It was then

noticed that one of the few thumbs remaining to Bill was bleeding (not such a

wonder-worker after all). How womanish and somehow never seen that way before

was the shadowy division between her pale breasts when she bent down over the

man's hand! She took him for repairs to the kitchen. For a few minutes, three or four

little eternities which positively welled with artificial warmth, Dick and I remained

alone. He sat on a hard chair rubbing his forelimbs and frowning. I had an idle urge

to squeeze out the blackheads on the wings of his perspiring nose with my long

agate claws. He had nice sad eyes with beautiful lashes, and very white teeth. His

Adam's apple was large and hairy. Why don't they shave better, those young brawny

chaps? He and his Dolly had had unrestrained intercourse on that couch there, at

least a hundred and eighty times, probably much more; and before that--how long

had she known him? No grudge. Funny--no grudge at all, nothing except grief and

nausea. He was now rubbing his nose. I was sure that when finally he would open

his mouth, he would say (slightly shaking his head): "Aw, she's a swell kid, Mr. Haze.

She sure is. And she's going to make a swell mother." He opened his mouth--and

took a sip of beer. This gave him countenance--and he went on sipping till he frothed

at the mouth. He was a lamb. He had cupped her Florentine breasts. His fingernails

were black and broken, but the phalanges, the whole carpus, the strong shapely

wrist were far, far finer than mine: I have hurt too much too many bodies with my

twisted poor hands to be proud of them. French epithets, a Dorset yokel's knuckles,

an Austrian tailor's flat finger tips--that's Humbert Humbert. Good. If he was silent I

could be silent too. Indeed, I could very well do with a little rest in this subdued,

frightened-to-death rocking chair, before I drove to wherever the beast's lair was--

and then pulled the pistol's foreskin back, and then enjoyed the orgasm of the

crushed trigger: I was always a good little follower of the Viennese medicine man.

But presently I became sorry for poor Dick whom, in some hypnotoid way, I was

horribly preventing from making the only remark he could think up ("She's a swell

kid. . ."). "And so," I said, "you are going to Canada?" In the kitchen, Dolly was

laughing at something Bill had said or done. "And so," I shouted, "you are going to

Canada? Not Canada"--I re-shouted--"I mean Alaska, of course." He nursed his glass

and, nodding sagely, replied: "Well, he cut it on a jagger, I guess. Lost his right arm

in Italy." Lovely mauve almond trees in bloom. A blown-off surrealistic arm hanging

up there in the pointillistic mauve. A flowergirl tattoo on the hand. Dolly and band-

aided Bill reappeared. It occurred to me that her ambiguous, brown and pale beauty

excited the cripple. Dick, with a grin of relief stood up. He guessed Bill and he would

be going back to fix those wires. He guessed Mr. Haze and Dolly had loads of things

to say to each other. He guessed he would be seeing me before I left. Why do those

people guess so much and shave so little, and are so disdainful of hearing aids? "Sit

down," she said, audibly striking her flanks with her palms. I relapsed into the black

rocker. "So you betrayed me? Where did you go? Where is he now?" She took from

the mantelpiece a concave glossy snapshot. Old woman in white, stout, beaming,

bowlegged, very short dress; old man in his shirtsleeves, drooping mustache, watch

chain. Her in-laws. Living with Dick's brother's family in Juneau. "Sure you don't

want to smoke?" She was smoking herself. First time I saw her doing it. Streng

verboten under Humbert the Terrible. Gracefully, in a blue mist, Charlotte Haze rose

from her grave. I would find him through Uncle Ivory if she refused. "Betrayed you?

No." She directed the dart of her cigarette, index rapidly tapping upon it, toward the

hearth exactly as her mother used to do, and then, like her mother, oh my God, with

her fingernail scratched and removed a fragment of cigarette paper from her

underlip. No. She had not betrayed me. I was among friends. Edusa had warned her

that Cue liked little girls, had been almost jailed once, in fact (nice fact), and he

knew she knew. Yes . . . Elbow in palm, puff, smile, exhaled smoke, darting gesture.

Waxing reminiscent. He saw--smiling--through everything and everybody, because

he was not like me and her but a genius. A great guy. Full of fun. Had rocked with

laughter when she confessed about me and her, and said he had thought so. It was

quite safe, under the circumstances, to tell him . . . Well, Cue--they all called him

Cue-- Her camp five years ago. Curious coincidence--. . . took her to a dude ranch

about a day's drive from Elephant (Elphinstone). Named? Oh, some silly name--Duk

Duk Ranch--you know just plain silly--but it did not matter now, anyway, because

the place had vanished and disintegrated. Really, she meant, I could not imagine

how utterly lush that ranch was, she meant it had everything but everything, even

an indoor waterfall. Did I remember the red-haired guy we ("we" was good) had

once had some tennis with? Well, the place really belonged to Red's brother, but he

had turned it over to Cue for the summer. When Cue and she came, the others had

them actually go through a coronation ceremony and then--a terrific ducking, as

when you cross the Equator. You know. Her eyes rolled in synthetic resignation. "Go

on, please." Well. The idea was he would take her in September to Hollywood and

arrange a tryout for her, a bit part in the tennis-match scene of a movie picture

based on a play of his--Golden Guts--and perhaps even have her double one of its

sensational starlets on the Klieg-struck tennis court. Alas, it never came to that.

"Where is the hog now?" He was not a hog. He was a great guy in many respects.

But it was all drink and drugs. And, of course, he was a complete freak in sex

matters, and his friends were his slaves. I just could not imagine (I, Humbert, could

not imagine!) what they all did at Duk Duk Ranch. She refused to take part because

she loved him, and he threw her out. "What things?" "Oh, weird, filthy, fancy things.

I mean, he had two girls and tow boys, and three or four men, and the idea was for

all of us to tangle in the nude while an old woman took movie pictures." (Sade's

Justine was twelve at the start.) "What things exactly?" "Oh, things . . . Oh, I--really

I"--she uttered the "I" as a subdued cry while she listened to the source of the ache,

and for lack of words spread the five fingers of her angularly up-and-down-moving

hand. No, she gave it up, she refused to go into particulars with that baby inside her.

That made sense. "It is of no importance now," she said pounding a gray cushion

with her fist and then lying back, belly up, on the divan. "Crazy things, filthy things.

I said no, I'm just not going to [she used, in all insouciance really, a disgusting slang

term which, in a literal French translation, would be souffler] your beastly boys,

because I want only you. Well, he kicked me out." There was not much else to tell.

That winter 1949, Fay and she had found jobs. For almost two years she had--oh,

just drifted, oh, doing some restaurant work in small places, and then she had met

Dick. No, she did not know where the other was. In New York, she guessed. Of

course, he was so famous she would have found him at once if she had wanted. Fay

had tried to get back to the Ranch--and it just was not there any more--it had

burned to the ground, nothing remained, just a charred heap of rubbish. It was so

strange, so strange-- She closed her eyes and opened her mouth, leaning back on

the cushion, one felted foot on the floor. The wooden floor slanted, a little steel ball

would have rolled into the kitchen. I knew all I wanted to know. I had no intention of

torturing my darling. Somewhere beyond Bill's shack an afterwork radio had begun

singing of folly and fate, and there she was with her ruined looks and her adult,

rope-veined narrow hands and her goose-flesh white arms, and her shallow ears,

and her unkempt armpits, there she was (my Lolita!), hopelessly worn at seventeen,

with that baby, dreaming already in her of becoming a big shot and retiring around

2020 A.D.--and I looked and looked at her, and knew as clearly as I know I am to

die, that I loved her more than anything I had ever seen or imagined on earth, or

hoped for anywhere else. She was only the faint violet whiff and dead leaf echo of

the nymphet I had rolled myself upon with such cries in the past; an echo on the

brink of a russet ravine, with a far wood under a white sky, and brown leaves

choking the brook, and one last cricket in the crisp weeds . . . but thank God it was

not that echo alone that I worshipped. What I used to pamper among the tangled

vines of my heart, mon grand pichi radieux, had dwindled to its essence: sterile and

selfish vice, all that I canceled and cursed. You may jeer at me, and threaten to clear

the court, but until I am gagged and half-throttled, I will shout my poor truth. I insist

the world know how much I loved my Lolita, this Lolita, pale and polluted, and big

with another's child, but still gray-eyed, still sooty-lashed, still auburn and almond,

still Carmencita, still mine; Changeons de vie, ma Carmen, allons vivre quelque part

oy nous ne serons jamais siparis; Ohio? The wilds of Massachusetts? No matter,

even if those eyes of hers would fade to myopic fish, and her nipples swell and crack,

and her lovely young velvety delicate delta be tainted and torn--even then I would

go mad with tenderness at the mere sight of your dear wan face, at the mere sound

of your raucous young voice, my Lolita. "Lolita," I said, "this may be neither here nor

there but I have to say it. Life is very short. From here to that old car you know so

well there is a stretch of twenty, twenty-five paces. It is a very short walk. Make

those twenty-five steps. Now. Right now. Come just as you are. And we shall live

happily ever after." Carmen, voulez-vous venir avec moi? "You mean," she said

opening her eyes and raising herself slightly, the snake that may strike, "you mean

you will give us [us] that money only if I go with you to a motel. Is that what you

mean?" "No," I said, "you got it all wrong. I want you to leave your incidental Dick,

and this awful hole, and come to live with me, and die with me, and everything with

me" (words to that effect). "You're crazy," she said, her features working. "Think it

over, Lolita. There are no strings attached. Except, perhaps--well, no matter." (A

reprieve, I wanted to say but did not.) "Anyway, if you refuse you will still get your .

. . trousseau." "No kidding?" asked Dolly. I handed her an envelope with four

hundred dollars in cash and a check for three thousand six hundred more. Gingerly,

uncertainly, she received mon petit cadeau; and then her forehead became a

beautiful pink. "You mean," she said, with agonized emphasis, "you are giving us

four thousand bucks?" I covered my face with my hand and broke into the hottest

tears I had ever shed. I felt them winding through my fingers and down my chin,

and burning me, and my nose got clogged, and I could not stop, and then she

touched my wrist. "I'll die if you touch me," I said. "You are sure you are not coming

with me? Is there no hope of your coming? Tell me only this." "No," she said. "No,

honey, no." She had never called me honey before. "No," she said, "it is quite out of

the question. I would sooner go back to Cue. I mean--" She groped for words. I

supplied them mentally ("He broke my heart. You merely broke my life"). "I think,"

she went on--"oops"--the envelope skidded to the floor--she picked it up--"I think

it's oh utterly grand of you to give us all that dough. It settles everything, we can

start next week. Stop crying, please. You should understand. Let me get you some

more beer. Oh, don't cry, I'm so sorry I cheated so much, but that's the way things

are." I wiped my face and my fingers. She smiled at the cadeau. She exulted. She

wanted to call Dick. I said I would have to leave in a moment, did not want to see

him at all, at all. We tried to think of some subject of conversation. For some reason,

I kept seeing--it trembled and silkily glowed on my damn retina--a radiant child of

twelve, sitting on a threshold, "pinging" pebbles at an empty can. I almost said--

trying to find some casual remark--"I wonder sometimes what has become of the

little McCoo girl, did she ever get better?"--but stopped in time lest she rejoin: "I

wonder sometimes what has become of the little Haze girl . . ." Finally, I reverted to

money matters. That sum, I said, represented more or less the net rent from her

mother's house; she said: "Had it not been sold years ago?" No (I admit I had told

her this in order to sever all connections with R.); a lawyer would send a full account

of the financial situation later; it was rosy; some of the small securities her mother

had owned had gone up and up. Yes, I was quite sure I had to go. I had to go, and

find him, and destroy him. Since I would not have survived the touch of her lips, I

kept retreating in a mincing dance, at every step she and her belly made toward me.

She and the dog saw me off. I was surprised (this a rhetorical figure, I was not) that

the sight of the old car in which she had ridden as a child and a nymphet, left her so

very indifferent. All she remarked was it was getting sort of purplish about the gills. I

said it was hers, I could go by bus. She said don't be silly, they would fly to Jupiter

and buy a car there. I said I would buy this one from her for five hundred dollars. "At

this rate we'll be millionnaires next," she said to the ecstatic dog. Carmencita, lui

demandais-je . . . "One last word," I said in my horrible careful English, "are you

quite, quite sure that--well, not tomorrow, of course, and not after tomorrow, but--

well--some day, any day, you will not come to live with me? I will create a brand

new God and thank him with piercing cries, if you give me that microscopic hope" (to

that effect). "No," she said smiling, "no." "It would have made all the difference,"

said Humbert Humbert. Then I pulled out my automatic--I mean, this is the kind of

fool thing a reader might suppose I did. It never even occurred to me to do it. "Good

by-aye!" she changed, my American sweet immortal dead love; for she is dead and

immortal if you are reading this. I mean, such is the formal agreement with the so-

called authorities. Then, as I drove away, I heard her shout in a vibrant voice to her

Dick; and the dog started to lope alongside my car like a fat dolphin, but he was too

heavy and old, and very soon gave up. And presently I was driving through the

drizzle of the dying day, with the windshield wipers in full action but unable to cope

with my tears.



30

Leaving as I did Coalmont around four in the afternoon (by Route X--I do not

remember the number(, I might have made Ramsdale by dawn had not a short-cut

tempted me. I had to get onto Highway Y. My map showed quite blandly that just

beyond Woodbine, which I reached at nightfall, I could leave paved X and reached

paved Y by means of a transverse dirt road. It was only some forty miles long

according to my map. Otherwise I would have to follow X for another hundred miles

and then use leisurely looping Z to get to Y and my destination. However, the short-

cut in question got worse and worse, bumpier and bumpier, muddier and muddier,

and when I attempted to turn back after some ten miles of purblind, tortuous and

tortoise-slow progress, my old and weak Melmoth got stuck in deep clay. All was

dark and muggy, and hopeless. My headlights hung over a broad ditch full of water.

The surrounding country, if any, was a black wilderness. I sought to extricate myself

but my rear wheels only whined in slosh and anguish. Cursing my plight, I took off

my fancy clothes, changed into slacks, pulled on the bullet-riddled sweater, and

waded four miles back to a roadside farm. It started to rain on the way but I had not

the strength to go back for a mackintosh. Such incidents have convinced me that my

heart is basically sound despite recent diagnoses. Around midnight, a wrecker

dragged my car out. I navigated back to Highway X and traveled on. Utter weariness

overtook me and hour later, in an anonymous little town. I pulled up at the curb and

in darkness drank deep from a friendly flask. The rain had been canceled miles

before. It was a black warm night, somewhere in Appalachia. Now and then cars

passed me, red tail-lights receding, white headlights advancing, but the town was

dead. Nobody strolled and laughed on the sidewalks as relaxing burghers would in

sweet, mellow, rotting Europe. I was alone to enjoy the innocent night and my

terrible thoughts. A wire receptacle on the curb was very particular about acceptable

contents: Sweepings. Paper. No Garbage. Sherry-red letters of light marked a

Camera Shop. A large thermometer with the name of a laxative quietly dwelt on the

front of a drugstore. Rubinov's Jewelry company had a display of artificial diamonds

reflected in a red mirror. A lighted green clock swam in the linenish depths of Jiffy

Jeff Laundry. On the other side of the street a garage said in its sleep--genuflection

lubricity; and corrected itself to Gulflex Lubrication. An airplane, also gemmed by

Rubinov, passed, droning, in the velvet heavens. How many small dead-of-night

towns I had seen! This was not yet the last. Let me dally a little, he is as good as

destroyed. Some way further across the street, neon lights flickered twice slower

than my heart: the outline of a restaurant sign, a large coffee-pot, kept bursting,

every full second or so, into emerald life, and every time it went out, pink letters

saying Fine Foods relayed it, but the pot could still be made out as a latent shadow

teasing the eye before its next emerald resurrection. We made shadow-graphs. This

furtive burg was not far from The Enchanted Hunters. I was weeping again, drunk on

the impossible past.



31

At this solitary stop for refreshments between Coalmont and Ramsdale (between

innocent Dolly Schiller and jovial Uncle Ivor), I reviewed my case. With the utmost

simplicity and clarity I now saw myself and my love. Previous attempts seemed out

of focus in comparison. A couple of years before, under the guidance of an intelligent

French-speaking confessor, to whom, in a moment of metaphysical curiosity, I had

turned over a Protestant's drab atheism for an old-fashioned popish cure, I had

hoped to deduce from my sense of sin the existence of a Supreme Being. On those

frosty mornings in rime-laced Quebec, the good priest worked on me with the finest

tenderness and understanding. I am infinitely obliged to him and the great

Institution he represented. Alas, I was unable to transcend the simple human fact

that whatever spiritual solace I might find, whatever lithophanic eternities might be

provided for me, nothing could make my Lolita forget the foul lust I had inflicted

upon her. Unless it can be proven to me--to me as I am now, today, with my heart

and by beard, and my putrefaction--that in the infinite run it does not matter a jot

that a North American girl-child named Dolores Haze had been deprived of her

childhood by a maniac, unless this can be proven (and if it can, then life is a joke), I

see nothing for the treatment of my misery but the melancholy and very local

palliative of articulate art. To quote an old poet: The moral sense in mortals is the

duty We have to pay on mortal sense of beauty.



32

There was the day, during our first trip--our first circle of paradise--when in order to

enjoy my phantasms in peace I firmly decided to ignore what I could not help

perceiving, the fact that I was to her not a boy friend, not a glamour man, not a pal,

not even a person at all, but just two eyes and a foot of engorged brawn--to mention

only mentionable matters. There was the day when having withdrawn the functional

promise I had made her on the eve (whatever she had set her funny little heart on--

a roller rink with some special plastic floor or a movie matinee to which she wanted

to go alone), I happened to glimpse from the bathroom, through a chance

combination of mirror aslant and door ajar, a look on her face . . . that look I cannot

exactly describe . . . an expression of helplessness so perfect that it seemed to grade

into one of rather comfortable inanity just because this was the very limit of injustice

and frustration--and every limit presupposes something beyond it--hence the neutral

illumination. And when you bear in mind that these were the raised eyebrows and

parted lips of a child, you may better appreciate what depths of calculated carnality,

what reflected despair, restrained me from falling at her dear feet and dissolving in

human tears, and sacrificing my jealousy to whatever pleasure Lolita might hope to

derive from mixing with dirty and dangerous children in an outside world that was

real to her. And I have still other smothered memories, now unfolding themselves

into limbless monsters of pain. Once, in a sunset-ending street of Beardsley, she

turned to little Eva Rosen (I was taking both nymphets to a concert and walking

behind them so close as almost to touch them with my person), she turned to Eva,

and so very serenely and seriously, in answer to something the other had said about

its being better to die than hear Milton Pinski, some local schoolboy she knew, talk

about music, my Lolita remarked: "You know, what's so dreadful about dying is that

you are completely on your own"; and it struck me, as my automaton knees went up

and down, that I simply did not know a thing about my darling's mind and that quite

possibly, behind the awful juvenile clichis, there was in her a garden and a twilight,

and a palace gate--dim and adorable regions which happened to be lucidly and

absolutely forbidden to me, in my polluted rags and miserable convulsions; for I

often noticed that living as we did, she and I, in a world of total evil, we would

become strangely embarrassed whenever I tried to discuss something she and an

older friend, she and a parent, she and a real healthy sweetheart, I and Annabel,

Lolita and a sublime, purified, analyzed, deified Harold Haze, might have discussed--

an abstract idea, a painting, stippled Hopkins or shorn Baudelaire, God or

Shakespeare, anything of genuine kind. Good will! She would mail her vulnerability

in trite brashness and boredom, whereas I, using for my desperately detached

comments an artificial tone of voice that set my own last teeth on edge, provoked

my audience to such outbursts of rudeness as made any further conversation

impossible, oh my poor, bruised child. I loved you. I was a pentapod monster, but I

loved you. I was despicable and brutal, and turpid, and everything, mais je t'aimais,

je t'aimais! And there were times when I knew how you felt, and it was hell to know

it, my little one. Lolita girl, brave Dolly Schiller. I recall certain moments, let us call

them icebergs in paradise, when after having had my fill of her--after fabulous,

insane exertions that left me limp and azure-barred--I would gather her in my arms

with, at last, a mute moan of human tenderness (her skin glistening in the neon light

coming from the paved court through the slits in the blind, her soot-black lashes

matted, her grave gray eyes more vacant than ever--for all the world a little patient

still in the confusion of a drug after a major operation)--and the tenderness would

deepen to shame and despair, and I would lull and rock my lone light Lolita in my

marble arms, and moan in her warm hair, and caress her at random and mutely ask

her blessing, and at the peak of this human agonized selfless tenderness (with my

soul actually hanging around her naked body and ready to repent), all at once,

ironically, horribly, lust would swell again--and "oh, no," Lolita would say with a sigh

to heaven, and the next moment the tenderness and the azure--all would be

shattered. Mid-twentieth century ideas concerning child-parent relationship have

been considerably tainted by the scholastic rigmarole and standardized symbols of

the psychoanalytic racket, but I hope I am addressing myself to unbiased readers.

Once when Avis's father had honked outside to signal papa had come to take his pet

home, I felt obliged to invite him into the parlor, and he sat down for a minute, and

while we conversed, Avis, a heavy, unattractive, affectionate child, drew up to him

and eventually perched plumply on his knee. Now, I do not remember if I have

mentioned that Lolita always had an absolutely enchanting smile for strangers, a

tender furry slitting of the eyes, a dreamy sweet radiance of all her features which

did not mean a thing of course, but was so beautiful, so endearing that one found it

hard to reduce such sweetness to but a magic gene automatically lighting up her

face in atavistic token of some ancient rite of welcome--hospitable prostitution, the

coarse reader may say. Well, there she stood while Mr. Byrd twirled his hat and

talked, and--yes, look how stupid of me, I have left out the main characteristic of the

famous Lolita smile, namely: while the tender, nectared, dimpled brightness played,

it was never directed at the stranger in the room but hung in its own remote

flowered void, so to speak, or wandered with myopic softness over chance objects--

and this is what was happening now: while fat Avis sidled up to her papa, Lolita

gently beamed at a fruit knife that she fingered on the edge of the table, whereon

she leaned, many miles away from me. Suddenly, as Avis clung to her father's neck

and ear while, with a casual arm, the man enveloped his lumpy and large offspring, I

saw Lolita's smile lose all its light and become a frozen little shadow of itself, and the

fruit knife slipped off the table and struck her with its silver handle a freak blow on

the ankle which made her gasp, and crouch head forward, and then, jumping on one

leg, her face awful with the preparatory grimace which children hold till the tears

gush, she was gone--to be followed at once and consoled in the kitchen by Avis who

had such a wonderful fat pink dad and a small chubby brother, and a brand-new

baby sister, and a home, and two grinning dogs, and Lolita had nothing. And I have

a neat pendant to that little scene--also in a Beardsley setting. Lolita, who had been

reading near the fire, stretched herself, and then inquired, her elbow up, with a

grunt: "Where is she buried anyway?" "Who?" "Oh, you know, my murdered

mummy." "And you know where her grave is," I said controlling myself, whereupon I

named the cemetery--just outside Ramsdale, between the railway tracks and

Lakeview Hill. "Moreover," I added, "the tragedy of such an accident is somewhat

cheapened by the epithet you saw fit to apply to it. If you really wish to triumph in

your mind over the idea of death--" "Ray," said Lo for hurrah, and languidly left the

room, and for a long while I stared with smarting eyes into the fire. Then I picked up

her book. It was some trash for young people. There was a gloomy girl Marion, and

there was her stepmother who turned out to be, against all expectations, a young,

gay, understanding redhead who explained to Marion that Marion's dead mother had

really been a heroic woman since she had deliberately dissimulated her great love for

Marion because she was dying, and did not want her child to miss her. I did not rush

up to her room with cries. I always preferred the mental hygiene of noninterference.

Now, squirming and pleading with my own memory, I recall that on this and similar

occasions, it was always my habit and method to ignore Lolita's states of mind while

comforting my own base self. When my mother, in a livid wet dress, under the

tumbling mist (so I vividly imagined her), had run panting ecstatically up that ridge

above Moulinet to be felled there by a thunderbolt, I was but an infant, and in

retrospect no yearnings of the accepted kind could I ever graft upon any moment of

my youth, no matter how savagely psychotherapists heckled me in my later periods

of depression. But I admit that a man of my power of imagination cannot plead

personal ignorance of universal emotions. I may also have relied too much on the

abnormally chill relations between Charlotte and her daughter. But the awful point of

the whole argument is this. It had become gradually clear to my conventional Lolita

during our singular and bestial cohabitation that even the most miserable of family

lives was better than the parody of incest, which, in the long run, was the best I

could offer the waif.



33

Ramsdale revisited. I approached it from the side of the lake. The sunny noon was all

eyes. As I rode by in my mud-flecked car, I could distinguish scintillas of diamond

water between the far pines. I turned into the cemetery and walked among the long

and short stone monuments. Bonzhur, Charlotte. On some of the graves there were

pale, transparent little national flags slumped in the windless air under the

evergreens. Gee, Ed, that was bad luck--referring to G. Edward Grammar, a thirty-

five-year-old New York office manager who had just been arrayed on a charge of

murdering his thirty-three-year-old wife, Dorothy. Bidding for the perfect crime, Ed

had bludgeoned his wife and put her into a car. The case came to light when two

county policemen on patrol saw Mrs. Grammar's new big blue Chrysler, an

anniversary present from her husband, speeding crazily down a hill, just inside their

jurisdiction (God bless our good cops!). The car sideswiped a pole, ran up an

embankment covered with beard grass, wild strawberry and cinquefoil, and

overturned. The wheels were still gently spinning in the mellow sunlight when the

officers removed Mrs. G's body. It appeared to be routine highway accident at first.

Alas, the woman's battered body did not match up with only minor damage suffered

by the car. I did better. I rolled on. It was funny to see again the slender white

church and the enormous elms. Forgetting that in an American suburban street a

lone pedestrian is more conspicuous than a lone motorist, I left the car in the avenue

to walk unobtrusively past 342 Lawn Street. Before the great bloodshed, I was

entitled to a little relief, to a cathartic spasm of mental regurgitation. Closed were

the white shutters of the Junk mansion, and somebody had attached a found black

velvet hair ribbon to the white FOR SALE sign which was leaning toward the

sidewalk. No dog barked. No gardener telephoned. No Miss Opposite sat on the vined

porch--where to the lone pedestrian's annoyance two pony-tailed young women in

identical polka-dotted pinafores stopped doing whatever they were doing to stare at

him: she was long dead, no doubt, these might be her twin nieces from Philadelphia.

Should I enter my old house? As in a Turgenev story, a torrent of Italian music came

from an open window--that of the living room: what romantic soul was playing the

piano where no piano had plunged and plashed on that bewitched Sunday with the

sun on her beloved legs? All at once I noticed that from the lawn I had mown a

golden-skinned, brown-haired nymphet of nine or ten, in white shorts, was looking at

me with wild fascination in her large blue-black eyes. I said something pleasant to

her, meaning no harm, an old-world compliment, what nice eyes you have, but she

retreated in haste and the music stopped abruptly, and a violent-looking dark man,

glistening with sweat, came out and glared at me. I was on the point of identifying

myself when, with a pang of dream-embarrassment, I became aware of my mud-

caked dungarees, my filthy and torn sweater, my bristly chin, my bum's bloodshot

eyes. Without saying a word, I turned and plodded back the way I had come. An

aster-like anemic flower grew out of a remembered chink in the sidewalk. Quietly

resurrected, Miss Opposite was being wheeled out by her nieces, onto her porch, as

if it were a stage and I the star performer. Praying she would not call to me, I

hurried to my car. What a steep little street. What a profound avenue. A red ticket

showed between wiper and windshield; I carefully tore it into two, four, eight pieces.

Feeling I was losing my time, I drove energetically to the downtown hotel where I

had arrived with a new bag more than five years before. I took a room, made two

appointments by telephone, shaved, bathed, put on black clothes and went down for

a drink in the bar. Nothing had changed. The barroom was suffused with the same

dim, impossible garnet-red light that in Europe years ago went with low haunts, but

here meant a bit of atmosphere in a family hotel. I sat at the same little table where

at the very start of my stay, immediately after becoming Charlotte's lodger, I had

thought fit to celebrate the occasion by suavely sharing with her half a bottle of

champagne, which had fatally conquered her poor brimming heart. As then, a moon-

faced waiter was arranging with stellar care fifty sherries on a round tray for a

wedding party. Murphy-Fantasia, this time. It was eight minutes to three. As I

walked though the lobby, I had to skirt a group of ladies who with mille grbces were

taking leave of each other after a luncheon party. With a harsh cry of recognition,

one pounced upon me. She was a stout, short woman in pearl-gray, with a long,

gray, slim plume to her small hat. It was Mrs. Chatfield. She attacked me with a fake

smile, all aglow with evil curiosity. (Had I done to Dolly, perhaps, what Frank Lasalle,

a fifty-year-old mechanic, had done o eleven-year-old Sally Horner in 1948?) Very

soon I had that avid glee well under control She thought I was in California. How

was--? With exquisite pleasure I informed her that my stepdaughter had just married

a brilliant young mining engineer with a hush-hush job in the Northwest. She said

she disapproved of such early marriages, she would never let her Phillys, who was

now eighteen-- "Oh yes, of course," I said quietly. "I remember Phyllis. Phyllis and

Camp Q. yes, of course. By the way, did she ever tell you how Charlie Holmes

debauched there his mother's little charges?" Mrs. Chatfiled's already broken smile

now disintegrated completely. "For shame," she cried, "for shame, Mr. Humbert! The

poor boy has just been killed in Korea." I said didn't she think "vient de," with the

infinitive, expressed recent events so much more neatly than the English "just," with

the past? But I had to be trotting off, I said. There were only two blocks to

Windmuller's office. He greeted me with a very slow, very enveloping, strong,

searching grip. He thought I was in California. Had I not lived at one time at

Beardsley? His daughter had just entered Beardsley College. And how was--? I have

all necessary information about Mrs. Schiller. We had a pleasant business

conference. I walked out into the hot September sunshine a contented pauper. Now

that everything had been put out of the way, I could dedicate myself freely to the

main object of my visit to Ramsdale. In the methodical manner on which I have

always prided myself, I had been keeping Clare Quilty's face masked in my dark

dungeon, where he was waiting for me to come with barber and priest: "Riveillez-

vous, Laqueue, il est temps de mourir!" I have no time right now to discuss the

mnemonics of physiognomization--I am on my way to his uncle and walking fast--

but let me jot down this: I had preserved in the alcohol of a clouded memory the

toad of a face. In the course of a few glimpses, I had noticed its slight resemblance

to a cheery and rather repulsive wine dealer, a relative of mine in Switzerland. With

his dumbbells and stinking tricot, and fat hairy arms, and bald patch, and pig-faced

servant-concubine, he was on the whole a harmless old rascal. Too harmless, in fact,

to be confused with my prey. In the state of mind I now found myself, I had lost

contact with Trapp's image. It had become completely engulfed by the face of Clare

Quilty--as represented, with artistic precision, by an easeled photograph of him that

stood on his uncle's desk. In Beardsley, at the hands of charming Dr. Molnar, I had

undergone a rather serious dental operation, retaining only a few upper and lower

front teeth. The substitutes were dependent on a system of plates with an

inconspicuous wire affair running along my upper gums. The whole arrangement was

a masterpiece of comfort, and my canines were in perfect health. However, to

garnish my secret purpose with a plausible pretext, I told Dr. Quilty that, in hope of

alleviating facial neuralgia, I had decided to have all my teeth removed. What would

a complete set of dentures cost? How long would the process take, assuming we

fixed our first appointment for some time in November? Where was his famous

nephew now? Would it be possible to have them all out in one dramatic session? A

white-smocked, gray-haired man, with a crew cut and the big flat cheeks of a

politician, Dr. Quilty perched on the corner of his desk, one foot dreamily and

seductively rocking as he launched on a glorious long-range plan. He would first

provide me with provisional plates until the gums settled. Then he would make me a

permanent set. He would like to have a look at that mouth of mine. He wore

perforated pied shoes. He had not visited with the rascal since 1946, but supposed

he could be found at his ancestral home, Grimm Road, not far from Parkington. It

was a noble dream. His foot rocked, his gaze was inspired. It would cost me around

six hundred. He suggested he take measurements right away, and make the first set

before starting operations. My mouth was to him a splendid cave full of priceless

treasures, but I denied him entrance. "No," I said. "On second thoughts, I shall have

it all done by Dr. Molnar. His price is higher, but he is of course a much better

dentist than you." I do not know if any of my readers will ever have a chance to say

that. It is a delicious dream feeling. Clare's uncle remained sitting on the desk, still

looking dreamy, but his foot had stopped push-rocking the cradle of rosy

anticipation. On the other hand, his nurse, a skeleton-thin, faded girl, with the tragic

eyes of unsuccessful blondes, rushed after me so as to be able to slam the door in

my wake. Push the magazine into the butt. Press home until you hear or feel the

magazine catch engage. Delightfully snug. Capacity: eight cartridges. Full Blued.

Aching to be discharged.



34

A gas station attendant in Parkington explained to me very clearly how to get to

Grimm Road. Wishing to be sure Quilty would be at home, I attempted to ring him

up but learned that his private telephone had recently been disconnected. Did that

mean he was gone? I started to drive to Grimm Road, twelve miles north of the

town. By that time night had eliminated most of the landscape and as I followed the

narrow winding highway, a series of short posts, ghostly white, with reflectors,

borrowed my own lights to indicate this or that curve. I could make out a dark valley

on one side of the road and wooded slopes on the other, and in front of me, like

derelict snowflakes, moths drifted out of the blackness into my probing aura. At the

twelfth mile, as foretold, a curiously hooded bridge sheathed me for a moment and,

beyond it, a white-washed rock loomed on the right, and a few car lengths further,

on the same side, I turned off the highway up gravelly Grimm Road. For a couple of

minutes all was dank, dark, dense forest. Then, Pavor Manor, a wooden house with a

turret, arose in a circular clearing. Its windows glowed yellow and red; its drive was

cluttered with half a dozen cars. I stopped in the shelter of the trees and abolished

my lights to ponder the next move quietly. He would be surrounded by his henchmen

and whores. I could not help seeing the inside of that festive and ramshackle castle

in terms of "Troubled Teens," a story in one of her magazines, vague "orgies," a

sinister adult with penele cigar, drugs, bodyguards. At least, he was there. I would

return in the torpid morning. Gently I rolled back to town, in that old faithful car of

mine which was serenely, almost cheerfully working for me. My Lolita! There was still

a three-year-old bobby pin of hers in the depths of the glove compartment. There

was still that stream of pale moths siphoned out of the night by my headlights. Dark

barns still propped themselves up here and there by the roadside. People were still

going to the movies. While searching for night lodgings, I passed a drive-in. In a

selenian glow, truly mystical in its contrast with the moonless and massive night, on

a gigantic screen slanting away among dark drowsy fields, a thin phantom raised a

gun, both he and his arm reduced to tremulous dishwater by the oblique angle of

that receding world,--and the next moment a row of trees shut off the gesticulation.



35

I left Insomnia Lodge next morning around eight and spent some time in Parkington.

Visions of bungling the execution kept obsessing me. Thinking that perhaps the

cartridges in the automatic had gone stale during a week of inactivity, I removed

them and inserted a fresh batch. Such a thorough oil bath did I give Chum that now

I could not get rid of the stuff. I bandaged him up with a rag, like a maimed limb,

and used another rag to wrap up a handful of spare bullets. A thunderstorm

accompanied me most of the way back to Grimm Road, but when I reached Pavor

Manor, the sun was visible again, burning like a man, and the birds screamed in the

drenched and steaming trees. The elaborate and decrepit house seemed to stand in

a kind of daze, reflecting as it were my own state, for I could not help realizing, as

my feet touched the springy and insecure ground, that I had overdone the alcoholic

stimulation business. A guardedly ironic silence answered my bell. The garage,

however, was loaded with his car, a black convertible for the nonce. I tried the

knocker. Re-nobody. With a petulant snarl, I pushed the front door--and, how nice, it

swung open as in a medieval fairy tale. Having softly closed it behind me, I made my

way across a spacious and very ugly hall; peered into an adjacent drawing room;

noticed a number of used glasses growing out of the carpet; decided that master

was still asleep in the master bedroom. So I trudged upstairs. My right hand clutched

muffled Chum in my pocket, my left patted the sticky banisters. Of the three

bedrooms I inspected, one had obviously been slept in that night. There was a

library full of flowers. There was a rather bare room with ample and deep mirrors

and a polar bear skin on the slippery floor. There were still other rooms. A happy

though struck me. If and when master returned from his constitutional in the woods,

or emerged from some secret lair, it might be wise for an unsteady gunman with a

long job before him to prevent his playmate from locking himself up in a room.

Consequently, for at least five minutes I went about--lucidly insane, crazily calm, an

enchanted and very tight hunter--turning whatever keys in whatever locks there

were and pocketing more planned privacy than have modern glamour-boxes, where

the bathroom, the only lockable locus, has to be used for the furtive needs of

planned parenthood. Speaking of bathrooms--I was about to visit a third one when

master came out of it, leaving a brief waterfall behind him. The corner of a passage

did not quite conceal me. Gray-faced, baggy-eyed, fluffily disheveled in a scanty

balding way, but still perfectly recognizable, he swept by me in a purple bathrobe,

very like one I had. He either did not notice me, or else dismissed me as some

familiar and innocuous hallucination--and, showing me his hairy calves, he

proceeded, sleepwalker-wise, downstairs. I pocketed my last key and followed him

into the entrance hall. He had half opened his mouth and the front door, to peer out

through a sunny chink as one who thinks he has heard a half-hearted visitor ring and

recede. Then, still ignoring the raincoated phantasm that had stopped in midstairs,

master walked into a cozy boudoir across the hall from the drawing room, through

which--taking it easy, knowing he was safe--I now went away from him, and in a

bar-adorned kitchen gingerly unwrapped dirty Chum, talking care not to leave any oil

stains on the chrome--I think I got the wrong product, it was black and awfully

messy. In my usual meticulous way, I transferred naked Chum to a clean recess

about me and made for the little boudoir. My step, as I say, was springy--too springy

perhaps for success. But my heart pounded with tiger joy, and I crunched a cocktail

glass underfoot. Master met me in the Oriental parlor. "Now who are you?" he asked

in a high hoarse voice, his hands thrust into his dressing-gown pockets, his eyes

fixing a point to the northeast of my head. "Are you by any chance Brewster?" By

now it was evident to everybody that he was in a fog and completely at my so-called

mercy. I could enjoy myself. "That's right," I answered suavely. "Je suis Monsieur

Brusthre. Let us chat for a moment before we start." He looked pleased. His smudgy

mustache twitched. I removed my raincoat. I was wearing a black suit, a black shirt,

no tie. We sat down in two easy chairs. "You know," he said, scratching loudly his

fleshy and gritty gray cheek and showing his small pearly teeth in a crooked grin,

"you don't look like Jack Brewster. I mean, the resemblance is not particularly

striking. Somebody told me he had a brother with the same telephone company." To

have him trapped, after those years of repentance and rage . . . To look at the black

hairs on the back of his pudgy hands . . . To wander with a hundred eyes over his

purple silks and hirsute chest foreglimpsing the punctures, and mess, and music of

pain . . . To know that this semi-animated, subhuman trickster who had sodomized

my darling--oh, my darling, this was intolerable bliss! "No, I am afraid I am neither

of the Brewsters." He cocked his head, looking more pleased than ever. "Guess

again, Punch." "Ah," said Punch, "so you have not come to bother me about those

long-distance calls?" "You do make them once in a while, don't you?" "Excuse me?" I

said I had said I thought he had said he had never-- "People," he said, "people in

general, I'm not accusing you, Brewster, but you know it's absurd the way people

invade this damned house without even knocking. They use the vaterre, they use the

kitchen, they use the telephone. Phil calls Philadelphia. Pat calls Patagonia. I refuse

to pay. You have a funny accent, Captain." "Quilty," I said, "do you recall a little girl

called Dolores Haze, Dolly Haze? Dolly called Dolores, Colo.?" "Sure, she may have

made those calls, sure. Any place. Paradise, Wash., Hell Canyon. Who cares?" "I do,

Quilty. You see, I am her father." "Nonsense," he said. "You are not. You are some

foreign literary agent. A Frenchman once translated my Proud Flesh as La Fierti de la

Chair. Absurd." "She was my child, Quilty." In the state he was in he could not really

be taken aback by anything, but his blustering manner was not quite convincing. A

sort of wary inkling kindled his eyes into a semblance of life. They were immediately

dulled again. "I'm very fond of children myself," he said, "and fathers are among my

best friends." He turned his head away, looking for something. He beat his pockets.

He attempted to rise from his seat. "Down!" I said--apparently much louder than I

intended. "You need not roar at me," he complained in his strange feminine manner.

"I just wanted a smoke. I'm dying for a smoke." "You're dying anyway." "Oh,

chucks," he said. "You begin to bore me. What do you want? Are you French, mister?

Wooly-woo-boo-are? Let's go to the barroomette and have a stiff--" He saw the little

dark weapon lying in my palm as if I were offering it to him. "Say!" he drawled (now

imitating the underworld numskull of movies), "that's a swell little gun you've got

there. What d'you want for her?" I slapped down his outstretched hand and he

managed to knock over a box on a low table near him. It ejected a handful of

cigarettes. "Here they are," he said cheerfully. "You recall Kipling: une femme est

une femme, mais un Caporal est une cigarette? Now we need matches." "Quilty," I

said. "I want you to concentrate. You are going to die in a moment. The hereafter for

all we know may be an eternal state of excruciating insanity. You smoked your last

cigarette yesterday. Concentrate. Try to understand what is happening to you." He

kept taking the Drome cigarette apart and munching bits of it. "I am willing to try,"

he said. "You are either Australian, or a German refugee. Must you talk to me? This

is a Gentile's house, you know. Maybe, you'd better run along. And do stop

demonstrating that gun. I've an old Stern-Luger in the music room." I pointed Chum

at his slippered foot and crushed the trigger. It clicked. He looked at his foot, at the

pistol, again at his foot. I made another awful effort, and, with a ridiculously feeble

and juvenile sound, it went off. The bullet entered the thick pink rug, and I had the

paralyzing impression that it had merely trickled in and might come out again. "See

what I mean?" said Quilty. "You should be a little more careful. Give me that thing

for Christ's sake." He reached for it. I pushed him back into the chair. The rich joy

was waning. It was high time I destroyed him, but he must understand why he was

being destroyed. His condition infected me, the weapon felt limp and clumsy in my

hand. "Concentrate," I said, "on the thought of Dolly Haze whom you kidnapped--" "I

did not!" he cried. "You're all wet. I saved her from a beastly pervert. Show me your

badge instead of shooting at my foot, you ape, you. Where is that badge? I'm not

responsible for the rapes of others. Absurd! That joy ride, I grant you, was a silly

stunt but you got her back, didn't you? Come, let's have a drink." I asked him

whether he wanted to be executed sitting or standing. "Ah, let me think," he said. "It

is not an easy question. Incidentally--I made a mistake. Which I sincerely regret.

You see, I had no fun with your Dolly. I am practically impotent, to tell the

melancholy truth. And I gave her a splendid vacation. She met some remarkable

people. Do you happen to know--" And with a tremendous lurch he fell all over me,

sending the pistol hurtling under a chest of drawers. Fortunately he was more

impetuous than vigorous, and I had little difficulty in shoving him back into his chair.

He puffed a little and folded his arms on his chest. "Now you've done it," he said.

"Vous voilyu dans de beaux draps, mon vieux." His French was improving. I looked

around. Perhaps, if--Perhaps I could--On my hands and knees? Risk it? "Alors, que

fait-on?" he asked watching me closely. I stooped. He did not moved. I stooped

lower. "My dear sir," he said, "stop trifling with life and death. I am a playwright. I

have written tragedies, comedies, fantasies. I have made private movies out of

Justine and other eighteenth-century sexcapades. I'm the author of fifty-two

successful scenarios. I know all the ropes. Let me handle this. There should be a

poker somewhere, why don't I fetch it, and then we'll fish out your property."

Fussily, busybodily, cunningly, he had risen again while he talked. I groped under

the chest trying at the same time to keep an eye on him. All of a sudden I noticed

that he had noticed that I did not seem to have noticed Chum protruding from

beneath the other corner of the chest. We fell to wrestling again. We rolled all over

the floor, in each other's arms, like two huge helpless children. He was naked and

goatish under his robe, and I felt suffocated as he rolled over me. I rolled over him.

We rolled over me. They rolled over him. We rolled over us. In its published form,

this book is being read, I assume, in the first years of 2000 A.D. (1935 plus eighty or

ninety, live long, my love); and elderly readers will surely recall at this point the

obligatory scene in the Westerns of their childhood. Our tussle, however, lacked the

ox-stunning fisticuffs, the flying furniture. He and I were two large dummies, stuffed

with dirty cotton and rags. It was a silent, soft, formless tussle on the part of two

literati, one of whom was utterly disorganized by a drug while the other was

handicapped by a heart condition and too much gin. When at last I had possessed

myself of my precious weapon, and the scenario writer had been reinstalled in his

low chair, both of us were panting as the cowman and the sheepman never do after

their battle. I decided to inspect the pistol--our sweat might have spoiled something-

-and regain my wind before proceeding to the main item in the program. To fill in the

pause, I proposed he read his own sentence--in the poetical form I had given it. The

term "poetical justice" is one that may be most happily used in this respect. I handed

him a neat typescript. "Yes," he said, "splendid idea. Let me fetch my reading

glasses" (he attempted to rise). "No." "Just as you say. Shall I read out loud?" "Yes."

"Here goes. I see it's in verse. Because you took advantage of a sinner because you

took advantage because you took because you took advantage of my disadvantage .

. . "That's good, you know. That's damned good." . . . when I stood Adam-naked

before a federal law and all its stinging stars "Oh, grand stuff!" . . . Because you took

advantage of a sin when I was helpless moulting moist and tender hoping for the

best dreaming of marriage in a mountain state aye of a litter of Lolitas . . . "Didn't

get that." Because you took advantage of my inner essential innocence because you

cheated me-- "A little repetitious, what? Where was I?" Because you cheated me of

my redemption because you took her at the age when lads play with erector sets

"Getting smutty, eh?" a little downy girl still wearing poppies still eating popcorn in

the colored gloam where tawny Indians took paid croppers because you stole her

from her wax-browed and dignified protector spitting into his heavy-lidded eye

ripping his flavid toga and at dawn leaving the hog to roll upon his new discomfort

the awfulness of love and violets remorse despair while you took a dull doll to pieces

and threw its head away because of all you did because of all I did not you have to

die "Well, sir, this is certainly a fine poem. Your best as far as I'm concerned." He

folded and handed it back to me. I asked him if he had anything serious to say

before dying. The automatic was again ready for use on the person. He looked at it

and heaved a big sigh. "Now look here, Mac," he said. "You are drunk and I am a

sick man. Let us postpone the matter. I need quiet. I have to nurse my impotence.

Friends are coming in the afternoon to take me to a game. This pistol-packing farce

is becoming a frightful nuisance. We are men of the world, in everything--sex, free

verse, marksmanship. If you bear me a grudge, I am ready to make unusual

amends. Even an old-fashioned rencontre, sword or pistol, in Rio or elsewhere--is

not excluded. My memory and my eloquence are not at their best today, but really,

my dear Mr. Humbert, you were not an ideal stepfather, and I did not force your

little protigie to join me. It was she made me remove her to a happier home. This

house is not as modern as that ranch we shared with dear friends. But it is roomy,

cool in summer and winter, and in a word comfortable, so, since I intend retiring to

England or Florence forever, I suggest you move in. It is yours, gratis. Under the

condition you stop pointing at me that [he swore disgustingly] gun. By the way, I do

not know if you care for the bizarre, but if you do, I can offer you, also gratis, as

house pet, a rather exciting little freak, a young lady with three breasts, one a

dandy, this is a rare and delightful marvel of nature. Now, soyons raisonnables. You

will only wound me hideously and then rot in jail while I recuperate in a tropical

setting. I promise you, Brewster, you will be happy here, with a magnificent cellar,

and all the royalties from my next play--I have not much at the bank right now but I

propose to borrow--you know, as the Bard said, with that cold in his head, to borrow

and to borrow and to borrow. There are other advantages. We have here a most

reliable and bribable charwoman, a Mrs. Vibrissa--curious name--who comes from

the village twice a week, alas not today, she has daughters, granddaughters, a thing

or two I know about the chief of police makes him my slave. I am a playwright. I

have been called the American Maeterlinck. Maeterlinck-Schmetterling, says I. Come

on! All this is very humiliating, and I am not sure I am doing the right thing. Never

use herculanita with rum. Now drop that pistol like a good fellow. I knew your dear

wife slightly. You may use my wardrobe. Oh, another thing--you are going to like

this. I have an absolutely unique collection of erotica upstairs. Just to mention one

item: the in folio de-luxe Bagration Island by the explorer and psychoanalyst Melanie

Weiss, a remarkable lady, a remarkable work--drop that gun--with photographs of

eight hundred and something male organs she examined and measured in 1932 on

Bagration, in the Barda Sea, very illuminating graphs, plotted with love under

pleasant skies--drop that gun--and moreover I can arrange for you to attend

executions, not everybody knows that the chair is painted yellow--" Feu. This time I

hit something hard. I hit the back of a black rocking chair, not unlike Dolly Schiller's-

-my bullet hit the inside surface of its back whereupon it immediately went into a

rocking act, so fast and with such zest that any one coming into the room might

have been flabbergasted by the double miracle: that chair rocking in a panic all by

itself, and the armchair, where my purple target had just been, now void of all life

content. Wiggling his fingers in the air, with a rapid heave of his rump, he flashed

into the music room and the next second we were tugging and gasping on both sides

of the door which had a key I had overlooked. I won again, and with another abrupt

movement Clare the Impredictable sat down before the piano and played several

atrociously vigorous, fundamentally hysterical, plangent chords, his jowls quivering,

his spread hands tensely plunging, and his nostrils emitting the soundtrack snorts

which had been absent from our fight. Still singing those impossible sonorities, he

made a futile attempt to open with his foot a kind of seaman's chest near the piano.

My next bullet caught him somewhere in the side, and he rose from his chair higher

and higher, like old, gray, mad Nijinski, like Old faithful, like some old nightmare of

mine, to a phenomenal altitude, or so it seemed, as he rent the air--still shaking with

the rich black music--head thrown back in a howl, hand pressed to his brow, and

with his other hand clutching his armpit as if stung by a hornet, down he came on his

heels and, again a normal robed man, scurried out into the hall. I see myself

following him through the hall, with a kind of double, triple, kangaroo jump,

remaining quite straight on straight legs while bouncing up twice in his wake, and

then bouncing between him and the front door in a ballet-like stiff bounce, with the

purpose of heading him off, since the door was not properly closed. Suddenly

dignified, and somewhat morose, he started to walk up the broad stairs, and, shifting

my position, but not actually following him up the steps, I fired three or four times in

quick succession, wounding him at every blaze; and every time I did it to him, that

horrible thing to him, his face would twitch in an absurd clownish manner, as if he

were exaggerating the pain; he slowed down, rolled his eyes half closing them and

made a feminine "ah!" and he shivered every time a bullet hit him as if I were

tickling him, and every time I got him with those slow, clumsy, blind bullets of mine,

he would say under his breath, with a phony British accent--all the while dreadfully

twitching, shivering, smirking, but withal talking in a curiously detached and even

amiable manner: "Ah, that hurts, sir, enough! Ah, that hurts atrociously, my dear

fellow. I pray you, desist. Ah--very painful, very painful, indeed . . . God! Hah! This

is abominable, you should really not--" His voice trailed off as he reached the

landing, but he steadily walked on despite all the lead I had lodged in his bloated

body--and in distress, in dismay, I understood that far from killing him I was

injecting spurts of energy into the poor fellow, as if the bullets had been capsules

wherein a heady elixir danced. I reloaded the thing with hands that were black and

bloody--I had touched something he had anointed with his thick gore. Then I

rejoined him upstairs, the keys jangling in my pockets like gold. He was trudging

from room to room, bleeding majestically, trying to find an open window, shaking his

head, and still trying to talk me out of murder. I took aim at his head, and he retired

to the master bedroom with a burst of royal purple where his ear had been. "Get out,

get out of here," he said coughing and spitting; and in a nightmare of wonder, I saw

this blood-spattered but still buoyant person get into his bed and wrap himself up in

the chaotic bedclothes. I hit him at very close range through the blankets, and then

he lay back, and a big pink bubble with juvenile connotations formed on his lips,

grew to the size of a toy balloon, and vanished. I may have lost contact with reality

for a second or two--oh, nothing of the I-just-blacked-out sort that your common

criminal enacts; on the contrary, I want to stress the fact that I was responsible for

every shed drop of his bubbleblood; but a kind of momentary shift occurred as if I

were in the connubial bedroom, and Charlotte were sick in bed. Quilty was a very

sick man. I held one of his slippers instead of the pistol--I was sitting on the pistol.

Then I made myself a little more comfortable in the chair near the bed, and

consulted my wrist watch. The crystal was gone but it ticked. The whole sad business

had taken more than an hour. He was quiet at last. Far from feeling any relief, a

burden even weightier than the one I had hoped to get rid of was with me, upon me,

over me. I could not bring myself to touch him in order to make sure he was really

dead. He looked it: a quarter of his face gone, and two flies beside themselves with a

dawning sense of unbelievable luck. My hands were hardly in better condition than

his. I washed up as best I could in the adjacent bathroom. Now I could leave. As I

emerged on the landing, I was amazed to discover that a vivacious buzz I had just

been dismissing as a mere singing in my ears was really a medley of voices and

radio music coming from the downstairs drawing room. I found there a number of

people who apparently had just arrived and were cheerfully drinking Quilty's liquor.

There was a fat man in an easy chair; and two dark-haired pale young beauties,

sisters no doubt, big one and small one (almost a child), demurely sat side by side

on a davenport. A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes was in the act of

bringing two glasses out of the bar-like kitchen, where two or three women were

chatting and chinking ice. I stopped in the doorway and said: "I have just killed Clare

Quilty." "Good for you," said the florid fellow as he offered one of the drinks to the

elder girl. "Somebody ought to have done it long ago," remarked the fat man. "What

does he say, Tony?" asked a faded blonde from the bar. "He says," answered the

florid fellow, "he has killed Cue." "Well," said another unidentified man rising in a

corner where he had been crouching to inspect some records, "I guess we all should

do it to him some day." "Anyway," said Tony, "he'd better come down. We can't wait

for him much longer if we want to go to that game." "Give this man a drink

somebody," said the fat person. "What a beer?" said a woman in slacks, showing it

to me from afar. Only the two girls on the davenport, both wearing black, the

younger fingering a bright something about her white neck, only they said nothing,

but just smiled on, so young, so lewd. As the music paused for a moment, there was

a sudden noise on the stairs. Tony and I stepped out into the hall. Quilty of all people

had managed to crawl out onto the landing, and there we could see him, flapping

and heaving, and then subsiding, forever this time, in a purple heap. "Hurry up,

Cue," said Tony with a laugh. "I believe, he's still--" He returned to the drawing

room, music drowned the rest of the sentence. This, I said to myself, was the end of

the ingenious play staged for me by Quilty. With a heavy heart I left the house and

walked though the spotted blaze of the sun to my car. Two other cars were parked

on both sides of it, and I had some trouble squeezing out.



36

The rest is a little flattish and faded. Slowly I drove downhill, and presently found

myself going at the same lazy pace in a direction opposite to Parkington. I had left

my raincoat in the boudoir and Chum in the bathroom. No, it was not a house I

would have liked to live in. I wondered idly if some surgeon of genius might not alter

his own career, and perhaps the whole destiny of mankind, by reviving quilted

Quilty, Clare Obscure. Not that I cared; on the whole I wished to forget the whole

mess--and when I did learn he was dead, the only satisfaction it gave me, was the

relief of knowing I need not mentally accompany for months a painful and disgusting

convalescence interrupted by all kinds of unmentionable operations and relapses,

and perhaps an actual visit from him, with trouble on my part to rationalize him as

not being a ghost. Thomas had something. It is strange that the tactile sense, which

is so infinitely less precious to men than sight, becomes at critical moment our main,

if not only, handle to reality. I was all covered with Quilty--with the feel of that

tumble before the bleeding. The road now stretched across open country, and it

occurred to me--not by way of protest, not as a symbol, or anything like that, but

merely as a novel experience--that since I had disregarded all laws of humanity, I

might as well disregard the rules of traffic. So I crossed to the left side of the

highway and checked the feeling, and the feeling was good. It was a pleasant

diaphragmal melting, with elements of diffused tactility, all this enhanced by the

thought that nothing could be nearer to the elimination of basic physical laws than

deliberately driving on the wrong side of the road. In a way, it was a very spiritual

itch. Gently, dreamily, not exceeding twenty miles an hour, I drove on that queer

mirror side. Traffic was light. Cars that now and then passed me on the side I had

abandoned to them, honked at me brutally. Cars coming towards me wobbled,

swerved, and cried out in fear. Presently I found myself approaching populated

places. Passing through a red light was like a sip of forbidden Burgundy when I was a

child. Meanwhile complications were arising. I was being followed and escorted. Then

in front of me I saw two cars placing themselves in such a manner as to completely

block my way. With a graceful movement I turned off the road, and after two or

three big bounces, rode up a grassy slope, among surprised cows, and there I came

to a gentle rocking stop. A kind of thoughtful Hegelian synthesis linking up two dead

women. I was soon to be taken out of the car (Hi, Melmoth, thanks a lot, old fellow)-

-and was, indeed, looking forward to surrender myself to many hands, without doing

anything to cooperate, while they moved and carried me, relaxed, comfortable,

surrendering myself lazily, like a patient, and deriving an eerie enjoyment from my

limpness and the absolutely reliable support given me by the police and the

ambulance people. And while I was waiting for them to run up to me on the high

slope, I evoked a last mirage of wonder and hopelessness. One day, soon after her

disappearance, an attack of abominable nausea forced me to pull up on the ghost of

an old mountain road that now accompanied, now traversed a brand new highway,

with its population of asters bathing in the detached warmth of a pale-blue afternoon

in late summer. After coughing myself inside out, I rested a while on a boulder, and

then, thinking the sweet air might do me good, walked a little way toward a low

stone parapet on the precipice side of the highway. Small grasshoppers spurted out

of the withered roadside weeds. A very light cloud was opening its arms and moving

toward a slightly more substantial one belonging to another, more sluggish,

heavenlogged system. As I approached the friendly abyss, I grew aware of a

melodious unity of sounds rising like vapor from a small mining town that lay at my

feet, in a fold of the valley. One could make out the geometry of the streets between

blocks of red and gray roofs, and green puffs of trees, and a serpentine stream, and

the rich, ore-like glitter of the city dump, and beyond the town, roads crisscrossing

the crazy quilt of dark and pale fields, and behind it all, great timbered mountains.

But even brighter than those quietly rejoicing colors--for there are colors and shades

that seem to enjoy themselves in good company--both brighter and dreamier to the

ear than they were to the eye, was that vapory vibration of accumulated sounds that

never ceased for a moment, as it rose to the lip of granite where I stood wiping my

foul mouth. And soon I realized that all these sounds were of one nature, that no

other sounds but these came from the streets of the transparent town, with the

women at home and the men away. Reader! What I heard was but the melody of

children at play, nothing but that, and so limpid was the air that within this vapor of

blended voices, majestic and minute, remote and magically near, frank and divinely

enigmatic--one could hear now and then, as if released, an almost articulate spurt of

vivid laughter, or the crack of a bat, or the clatter of a toy wagon, but it was all

really too far for the eye to distinguish any movement in the lightly etched streets. I

stood listening to that musical vibration from my lofty slope, to those flashes of

separate cries with a kind of demure murmur for background, and then I knew that

the hopelessly poignant thing was not Lolita's absence from my side, but the absence

of her voice from that concord. This then is my story. I have reread it. It has bits of

marrow sticking to it, and blood, and beautiful bright-green flies. At this or that twist

of it I feel my slippery self eluding me, gliding into deeper and darker waters than I

care to probe. I have camouflaged what I could so as not to hurt people. And I have

toyed with many pseudonyms for myself before I hit on a particularly apt one. There

are in my notes "Otto Otto" and "Mesmer Mesmer" and "Lambert Lambert," but for

some reason I think my choice expresses the nastiness best. When I started, fifty-six

days ago, to write Lolita, first in the psychopathic ward for observation, and then in

this well-heated, albeit tombal, seclusion, I thought I would use these notes in toto

at my trial, to save not my head, of course, but my soul. In mind-composition,

however, I realized that I could not parade living Lolita. I still may use parts of this

memoir in hermetic sessions, but publication is to be deferred. For reasons that may

appear more obvious than they really are, I am opposed to capital punishment; this

attitude will be, I trust, shared by the sentencing judge. Had I come before myself, I

would have given Humbert at least thirty-five years for rape, and dismissed the rest

of the charges. But even so, Dolly Schiller will probably survive me by many years.

The following decision I make with all the legal impact and support of a signed

testament: I wish this memoir to be published only when Lolita is no longer alive.

Thus, neither of us is alive when the reader opens this book. But while the blood still

throbs through my writing hand, you are still as much part of blessed matter as I

am, and I can still talk to you from here to Alaska. Be true to your Dick. Do not let

other fellows touch you. Do not talk to strangers. I hope you will love your baby. I

hope it will be a boy. That husband of yours, I hope, will always treat you well,

because otherwise my specter shall come at him, like black smoke, like a demented

giant, and pull him apart nerve by nerve. And do not pity C. Q. One had to choose

between him and H.H., and one wanted H.H. to exist at least a couple of months

longer, so as to have him make you live in the minds of later generations. I am

thinking of aurochs and angels, the secret of durable pigments, prophetic sonnets,

the refuge of art. And this is the only immortality you and I may share, my Lolita.