C H A P T E R 1

YOU

ARE HERE

The entire Earth

is but a point, and the place of

our own habitation

but a minute corner of it.

—MARCUS

AURELIUS, ROMAN EMPEROR,



MEDITATIONS, BOOK 4 (CA. 170)

As the astronomers unanimously

teach, the circuit of the whole earth,

which to us seems endless, compared with

the greatness of the universe

has the

likeness of a mere tiny point.

—AMMIANUS

MARCELLINUS ACA. 330-395,

THE LAST

MAJOR ROMAN HISTORIAN,

IN THE CHRONICLE OF EVENTS

The spacecraft was a long way from home, beyond the

orbit of the outermost planet and high above the ecliptic

plane—which is an imaginary flat surface that we can think

of as something like a racetrack in which the orbits of the

planets are mainly confined. The ship was speeding away

from the Sun at 40,000 miles per hour. But in early

February of 1990, it was overtaken by an urgent message

from Earth.

Obediently, it turned its cameras back toward the

now-distant planets. Slewing its scan platform from one

spot in the sky to another, it snapped 60 pictures and

stored them in digital form on its tape recorder. Then,

slowly, in March, April, and May, it radioed the data back to

Earth. Each image was composed of 640,000 individual

picture elements ("pixels"), like the dots in a newspaper

wire-photo or a pointil ist painting. The spacecraft was 3.7

bil ion miles away from Earth, so far away that it took etch

pixel 5½ hours, traveling at the speed of light, to reach us.

The pictures might have been returned earlier, but the big

radio telescopes in California, Spain, and Australia that

receive these whispers from the edge of the Solar System

had responsibilities to other ships that ply the sea of space

among them, Magel an, bound for Venus, and Galileo on its

tortuous passage to Jupiter.

Voyager 1 was so high above the ecliptic plane

because, in 1981, it had made a close pass by Titan, the

giant moon of Saturn. Its sister ship, Voyager 2, was

dispatched on a different trajectory, within the ecliptic

plane, and so she was able to perform her celebrated

explorations of Uranus and Neptune The two Voyager

robots have explored four planets and nearly sixty moons.

They are triumphs of human engineering an. one of the

glories of the American space program. They wil he in the

history books when much else about our time forgotten.

The Voyagers were guaranteed to work only until the

Saturn encounter. I thought it might be a good idea, just

after Saturn, to have them take one last glance homeward.

From Saturn, I knew the Earth would appear too smal for

Voyager to make out any detail. Our planet would be just a

point of light, a lonely pixel, hardly distinguishable from the

many other points of light Voyager could see, nearby

planets and far-off suns. But precise because of the

obscurity of our world thus revealed, such picture might be

worth having.

Mariners had painstakingly mapped the coastlines

of the continents. Geographers had translated these

findings into charts and globes. Photographs of tiny

patches of the Earth had been obtained first by bal oons

and aircraft, then by rockets in brief bal istic flight, and at

last by orbiting spacecraft—giving a perspective like the

one you achieve by positioning your eyebal about an inch

above a large globe. While almost everyone is taught that

the Earth is a sphere with al of us somehow glued to it by

gravity, the reality of our circumstance did not real y begin

to sink in until the famous frame-fil ing Apol o photograph of

the whole Earth—the one taken by the Apol o 17 astronauts

on the last journey of humans to the Moon.

It has become a kind of icon of our age. There's

Antarctica at what Americans and Europeans so readily

regard as the bottom, and then al of Africa stretching up

above it: You can see Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Kenya,

where the earliest humans lived. At top right are Saudi

Arabia and what Europeans cal the Near East. Just barely

peeking out at the top is the Mediterranean Sea, around

which so much of our global civilization emerged. You can

make out the blue of the ocean, the yel ow-red of the

Sahara and the Arabian desert, the brown-green of forest

and grassland.

And yet there is no sign of humans in this picture, not

our reworking of the Earth's surface, not our machines, not

ourselves: We are too smal and our statecraft is too feeble

to be seen by a spacecraft between the Earth and the

Moon. From this vantage point, our obsession with

nationalism is nowhere in evidence. The Apol o pictures of

the whole Earth conveyed to multitudes something wel

known to astronomers: On the scale of worlds—to say

nothing of stars or galaxies—humans are inconsequential,

a thin film of life on an obscure and solitary lump of rock

and metal.

It seemed to me that another picture of the Earth,

this one taken from a hundred thousand times farther away,

might help in the continuing process of revealing to

ourselves our true circumstance and condition. It had been

wel understood by the scientists and philosophers of

classical antiquity that the Earth was a mere point in a vast

encompassing Cosmos, but no one had ever seen it as

such. Here was our first chance (and perhaps also our last

for decades to come).

Many in NASA's Voyager Project were supportive.

But from the outer Solar System the Earth lies very near the

Sun, like a moth enthral ed around a flame. Did we want to

aim the camera so close to the Sun as to risk burning out

the spacecraft's vidicon system? Wouldn't it be better to

delay until al the scientific images from Uranus and

Neptune, if the spacecraft lasted that long, were taken?

And so we waited— and a good thing too—from

1981 at Saturn, to 1986 at Uranus, to 1989, when both

spacecraft had passed the orbits of Neptune and Pluto. At

last the time came But there were a few instrumental

calibrations that needed to be done first, and we waited a

little longer. Although the spacecraft were in the right spots,

the instruments were stil working beautiful y, and there

were no other pictures to take, a few project personnel

opposed it. It wasn't science, they said. Then we

discovered that the technicians who devise and transmit

the radio commands to Voyager were, in a cash-strapped

NASA, to be laid off immediately or transferred to other

jobs. If the picture were to be taken, it had to be done right

then. At the last minute actual y, in the midst of the Voyager

2 encounter with Neptune, the then NASA Administrator,

Rear Admiral Richard Truly, stepped in and made sure that

these images were obtained. The space scientists Candy

Hansen of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and

Carolyn Porco of University of Arizona designed the

command sequence and calculated the camera exposure

times.

So here they are—a mosaic of squares laid down

on top of the planets and a background smattering of more

distant stars. We were able to photograph not only the

Earth, but also five other of the Sun's nine known planets.

Mercury, the innermost, was lost in the glare of the Sun, and

Mars and Pluto were too smal , too dimly lit, and/or too far

away. Uranus and Neptune are so dim that to record their

presence required long exposures; accordingly, their

images were smeared because of spacecraft motion. This

is how the planets would look to an alien spaceship

approaching the Solar System after a long interstel ar

voyage.

From this distance the planets seem only points of

light, smeared or unsmeared—even through the high-

resolution telescope aboard Voyager. They are like the

planets seen with the naked eye from the surface of the

Earth—luminous dots, brighter than most of the stars. Over

a period of months the Earth, like the other planets, would

seem to move among the stars. You cannot tel merely by

looking at one of these dots what it's like, what's on it, what

its past has been, and whether, n this particular epoch,

anyone lives there.

Because of the reflection of sunlight off the

spacecraft, the Earth seems to be sitting in a beam of light,

as if there were some special significance to this smal

world. But it's just an accident of geometry and optics. The

Sun emits its radiation equitably in al directions. Had the

picture been taken a little earlier or a little later, there would

have been no sunbeam highlighting the Earth.

And why that cerulean color? The blue comes partly

from the sea, partly from the sky. While water in a glass is

transparent, It absorbs slightly more red light than blue. If

you have tens of meters of the stuff or more, the red light is

absorbed out and what gets reflected back to space is

mainly blue. In the same way, a short line of sight through

air seems perfectly transparent. Nevertheless—something

Leonardo da Vinci excel ed at portraying—the more distant

the object, the bluer it seems. Why? Because the air

scatters blue light around much better than it does red. So

the bluish cast of this dot comes from its thick but

transparent atmosphere and its deep oceans of liquid

water. And the white? The Earth on an average day is

about half covered with white water clouds.

We can explain the wan blueness of this little world

because we know it wel . Whether an alien scientist newly

arrived at the outskirts of our solar system could reliably

deduce oceans and clouds and a thickish atmosphere is

less certain. Neptune, for instance, is blue, but chiefly for

different reasons. From this distant vantage point, the Earth

might not seem of any particular interest.

But for us, it's different. Look again at that dot. That's

here. That's home. That's us. On it everyone you love,

everyone you know, everyone you ever heard of, every

human being who ever was, lived out their lives. The

aggregate of our joy and suffering, thousands of confident

religions, ideologies, and economic doctrines, every hunter

and forager, every hero and coward, every creator and

destroyer of civilization, ever king and peasant, every young

couple in love, every moth and father, hopeful child, inventor

and explorer, every teacher of morals, every corrupt

politician, every "superstar,” every "supreme leader," every

saint and sinner in the history of our species lived there—

on a mote of dust suspended in a sunbeam.

The Earth is a very smal stage in a vast cosmic arena.

Think of the rivers of blood spil ed by al those generals and

emperors so that, in glory and triumph, they could become

momentary masters of a fraction of a dot. Think of the

endless visited by the inhabitants of one corner of this pixel

the scarcely distinguishable inhabitants of some other

corner, how frequent their misunderstandings, how eager

they are to kil one another, how fervent their hatreds.

Our posturings, our imagined self-importance, the

delusion that we have some privileged position in the

Universe, are chal enged by this point of pale light. Our

planet is a lonely speck in the great enveloping cosmic

dark. In our obscurity, in al this vastness, there is no hint

that help wil come from elsewhere to save us from

ourselves.

The Earth is the only world known so far to harbor life.

There is nowhere else, at least in the near future, to which

our species could migrate. Visit, yes. Settle, not yet. Like it

or not, for the moment the Earth is where we make our

stand.

It has been said that astronomy is a humbling and

character-building experience. There is perhaps no better

demonstration of the fol y of human conceits than this

distant image of our tiny world. To me, it underscores our

responsibility to deal more kindly with one another, and to

preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home

we've ever known.

C H

A P T E R 2

ABERRATIONS

OF

LIGHT

If man were taken away from the world,

the rest would seem to be al astray,

without aim or

purpose . . . and to be leading to nothing.

—FRANCIS BACON, WISDOM

OF THE ANCIENTS (1619)

Ann Druyan suggests an experiment: Look back again at

the pale blue dot of the preceding chapter. Take a good

long look at it. Stare at the dot for any length of time and

then try to convince yourself that God created the whole

Universe for one of the 10 mil ion or so species of life that

inhabit that speck of dust. Now take it a step further:

Imagine that everything was made just for a single shade of

that species, or gender, or ethnic or religious subdivision. If

this doesn't strike you as unlikely, pick another dot. Imagine

it to be inhabited by a different form of intel igent life. They,

too, cherish the notion of a God who has created everything

for their benefit. How seriously do you take their claim?

“SEE THAT STAR?"

"You mean the bright red one?" his daughter asks in

return.

"Yes. You know, it might not be there anymore. It

might be gone by now—exploded or something. Its light is

stil crossing space, just reaching our eyes now. But we

don't see it as it is. We see it as it was."

Many people experience a stirring sense of wonder

when they first confront this simple truth. Why? Why should

it be so compel ing? On our little world light travels, for al

practical purposes, instantaneously. If a lightbulb is glowing,

then of course it's physical y where we see it, shining away.

We reach out our hand and touch it: It's there al right, and

unpleasantly hot. If the filament fails, then the light goes out.

We don't see it in the same place, glowing, il uminating the

room years after the bulb breaks and it's removed from its

socket. The very notion seems nonsensical. But if we're far

enough away, an entire sun can go out and we'l continue to

see it shining brightly; we won't learn of its death, it may be,

for ages to come—in fact, for how long it takes light, which

travels fast but not infinitely fast, to cross the intervening

vastness.

The immense distances to the stars and the

galaxies mean that we see everything in space in the past

—some as they were before the Earth came to be.

Telescopes are time machines. Long ago, when an early

galaxy began to pour light out into the surrounding

darkness, no witness could have known that bil ions of

years later some remote clumps of rock and metal, ice and

organic molecules would fal together to make a place

cal ed Earth; or that life would arise and thinking beings

evolve who would one day capture a little of that galactic

light, and try to puzzle out what had sent it on its way.

And after the Earth dies, some 5 bil ion years from

now, after it is burned to a crisp or even swal owed by the

Sun, there wil be other worlds and stars and galaxies

coming into being—and they wil know nothing of a place

once cal ed Earth.

IT ALMOST NEVER FEELS like prejudice. Instead, it seems fitting

and just—the idea that, because of an accident of birth, our

group (whichever one it is) should have a central position in

the social universe. Among Pharaonic princelings and

Plantagenet pretenders, children of robber barons and

Central Committee bureaucrats, street gangs and

conquerors of nations, members of confident majorities,

obscure sects, and reviled minorities, this self-serving

attitude seems as natural as breathing. It draws sustenance

from the same psychic wel springs as sexism, racism,

nationalism, and the other deadly chauvinisms that plague

our species. Uncommon strength of character is needed to

resist the blandishments of those who assure us that we

have an obvious, even God-given, superiority over our

fel ows. The more precarious our self-esteem, the greater

our vulnerability to such appeals.

Since scientists are people, it is not surprising that

comparable pretensions have insinuated themselves into

the scientific worldview. Indeed, many of the central

debates in the history of science seem to be, in part at

least, contests over whether humans are special. Almost

always, the going-in assumption is that we are special.

After the premise is closely examined, though, it turns out—

in dishearteningly many cases—that we are not.

Our ancestors lived out of doors. They were as

familiar with the night sky as most of us are with our favorite

television programs. The Sun, the Moon, the stars, and the

planets al rose in the east and set in the west, traversing

the sky overhead in the interim. The motion of the heavenly

bodies was not merely a diversion, eliciting a reverential

nod and grunt; it was the only way to tel the time of day and

the seasons. For hunters and gatherers, as wel as for

agricultural peoples, knowing about the sky was a matter of

life and death.

How lucky for us that the Sun, the Moon, the planets,

and the stars are part of some elegantly configured cosmic

clockwork! It seemed to be no accident. They were put here

for a purpose, for our benefit. Who else makes use of

them? What else are they good for?

And if the lights in the sky rise and set around us,

isn't it evident that we're at the center of the Universe?

These celestial bodies—so clearly suffused with unearthly

powers, especial y the Sun on which we depend for light

and heat—circle us like courtiers fawning on a king. Even if

we had not already guessed, the most elementary

examination of the heavens reveals that we are special.

The Universe seems designed for human beings. It's

difficult to contemplate these circumstances without

experiencing stirrings of pride and reassurance. The entire

Universe, made for us! We must real y be something.

This satisfying demonstration of our importance,

buttressed by daily observations of the heavens, made the

geocentrist conceit a transcultural truth—taught in the

schools, built into the language, part and parcel of great

literature

and

sacred

scripture.

Dissenters

were

discouraged, sometimes with torture and death. It is no

wonder that for the vast bulk of human history, no one

questioned it.

It was doubtless the view of our foraging and hunting

ancestors. The great astronomer of antiquity, Claudius

Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy), in the second century knew that the

Earth was a sphere, knew that its size was "a point"

compared to the distance of the stars, and taught that it lay

"right in the middle of the heavens." Aristotle, Plato, St.

Augustine, St. Thomas Aquinas, and almost al the great

philosophers and scientists of al cultures over the 3,000

years ending in the seventeenth century bought into this

delusion. Some busied themselves figuring out how the

Sun, the Moon, the stars, and the planets could be

cunningly attached to perfectly transparent, crystal ine

spheres—the big spheres, of course, centered on the Earth

—that would explain the complex motions of the celestial

bodies so meticulously chronicled by generations of

astronomers.

And

they

succeeded:

With

later

modifications, the geocentric hypothesis adequately

accounted for the facts of planetary motion as known in the

second century, and in the sixteenth.

From there it was only a slight extrapolation to an

even more grandiose claim—that the "perfection" of the

world would be incomplete without humans, as Plato

asserted in the Timaeus. "Man . . . is al ," the poet and

cleric John Donne wrote in 1625. "He is not a piece of the

world, but the world itself; and next to the glory of God, the

reason why there is a world."

And yet—never mind how many kings, popes,

philosophers, scientists, and poets insisted on the contrary

—the Earth through those mil ennia stubbornly persisted in

orbiting the Sun. You might imagine an uncharitable

extraterrestrial observer looking down on our species over

al that time—with us excitedly chattering, "The Universe is

created for us! We're at the center! Everything pays

homage to us!"—and concluding that our pretensions are

amusing, our aspirations pathetic, that this must be the

planet of the idiots.

But such a judgment is too harsh. We did the best

we could. There was an unlucky coincidence between

everyday appearances and our secret hopes. We tend not

to be especial y critical when presented with evidence that

seems to confirm our prejudices. And there was little

countervailing evidence.

In muted counterpoint, a few dissenting voices,

counseling humility and perspective, could be heard down

through the centuries. At the dawn of science, the atomist

philosophers of ancient Greece and Rome— those who

first suggested that matter is made of atoms—Democritus,

Epicurus, and their fol owers (and Lucretius, the first

popularizer of science) scandalously proposed many

worlds and many alien life forms, al made of the same

kinds of atoms as we. They offered for our consideration

infinities in space and time. But in the prevailing canons of

the West, secular and sacerdotal, pagan and Christian,

atomist ideas were reviled. Instead, the heavens were not

at al like our world. They were unalterable and "perfect."

The Earth was mutable and "corrupt." The Roman

statesman and philosopher Cicero summarized the

common view: "In the heavens . . . there is nothing of

chance or hazard, no error, no frustration, but absolute

order, accuracy, calculation and regularity."

Philosophy and religion cautioned that the gods (or

God) were far more powerful than we, jealous of their

prerogatives and quick to mete out justice for insufferable

arrogance. At the same time, these disciplines had not a

clue that their own teaching of how the Universe is ordered

was a conceit and a delusion.

Philosophy and religion presented mere opinion—

opinion that might be overturned by observation and

experiment—as certainty. This worried them not at al . That

some of their deeply held beliefs might turn out to be

mistakes was a possibility hardly considered. Doctrinal

humility was to be practiced by others. Their own teachings

were inerrant and Infal ible. In truth, they had better reason

to be humble than they knew.

BEGINNING WITH COPERNICUS in the middle sixteenth century,

the issue was formal y joined. The picture of the Sun rather

than the Earth at the center of the Universe was understood

to be dangerous. Obligingly, many scholars were quick to

assure the religious hierarchy that this newfangled

hypothesis

represented

no

serious

chal enge

to

conventional wisdom. In a kind of split-brain compromise,

the Sun-centered system was treated as a mere

computational convenience, not an astronomical reality that

is, the Earth was real y at the center of the Universe, as

everybody knew; but if you wished to predict where Jupiter

would be on the second Tuesday of November the year

after next, you were permitted to pretend that the Sun was

at the center. Then you could calculate away and not affront

the Authorities.[†]

"This has no danger in it," wrote Robert Cardinal

Bel armine, the foremost Vatican theologian in the early

seventeenth century,

and suffices for the mathematicians. But, to affirm

that the Sun is real y fixed in the center of the

heavens and that the Earth revolves very swiftly

around the Sun is a dangerous thing, not only

irritating the theologians and philosophers, but

injuring our holy faith and making the sacred

scripture false."

"Freedom of belief is pernicious," Bel armine wrote on

another occasion. "It is nothing but the freedom to be

wrong."

Besides, if the Earth was going around the Sun,

nearby stars should seem to move against the background

of more distant stars as, every six months, we shift our

perspective from one side of the Earth's orbit to the other.

No such "annual paral ax" had been found. The

Copernicans argued that this was because the stars were

extremely far away—maybe a mil ion times more distant

than the Earth is from the Sun. Perhaps better telescopes,

in future times, would find an annual paral ax. The

geocentrists considered this a desperate attempt to save a

flawed hypothesis, and ludicrous on the face of it.

When Galileo turned the first astronomical telescope

to the sky, the tide began to turn. He discovered that Jupiter

had a little retinue of moons circling it, the inner ones

orbiting faster than the outer ones, just as Copernicus had

deduced for the motion of the planets about the Sun. He

found that Mercury and Venus went through phases like the

Moon (showing they orbited the Sun). Moreover, the

cratered Moon and the spotted Sun chal enged the

perfection of the heavens. This may in part constitute the

sort of trouble Tertul ian was worried about thirteen hundred

years earlier, when he pleaded, "If you have any sense or

modesty, have done with prying into the regions of the sky,

into the destiny and secrets of the universe."

In contrast, Galileo taught that we can interrogate

Nature by observation and experiment. Then, "facts which

at first sight seem improbable wil , even on scant

explanation, drop the cloak which had hidden them and

stand forth in naked and simple beauty." Are not these

facts, available even for skeptics to

confirm, a surer insight into God's Universe than al the

speculations of the theologians? But what if these facts

contradict the beliefs of those who hold their religion

incapable of making mistakes? The princes of the Church

threatened the aged astronomer with torture if he persisted

in teaching the abominable doctrine that the Earth moved.

He was sentenced to a kind of house arrest for the

remainder of his life.

A generation or two later, by the time Isaac Newton

demonstrated that simple and elegant physics could

quantitatively explain—and predict—al the observed lunar

and planetary motions (provided you assumed the Sun at

the center of the Solar System), the geocentrist conceit

eroded further.

In 1725, in an attempt to discover stel ar paral ax, the

painstaking English amateur astronomer James Bradley

stumbled on the aberration of light. The term "aberration," I

suppose, conveys something of the unexpectedness of the

discovery. When observed over the course of a year, stars

were found to trace little el ipses against the sky. But al the

stars were found to do so. This could not be stel ar paral ax,

where we would expect a big paral ax for nearby stars and

an indetectible one for faraway stars. Instead, aberration is

similar to how raindrop fal ing directly down on a speeding

auto seem to the passenger, to be fal ing at a slant; the

faster the car goes, the steeper the slant. If the Earth were

stationary at the center of the Universe. and not speeding in

its orbit around the Sun, Bradley would nor have found the

aberration of light. It was a compel ing demonstration that

the Earth revolved about the Sun. It convinced most

astronomers and some others but not, Bradley thought, the

"Anti-Copernicans."

But not until 1837 did direct observations of the

stars prove in the clearest way that the Earth is indeed

circling the Sun. The long-debated annual paral ax was at

last discovered—not by better arguments, but by better

instruments. Because explaining what it means is much

more straightforward than explaining the aberration of light,

its discovery was very important. It pounded the final nail

into the coffin of geocentrism. You need only look at your

finger with your left eye and then with your right and see it

seem to move. Everyone can understand paral ax.

By the nineteenth century, al scientific geocentrists

had been converted or rendered extinct. Once most

scientists had been convinced, informed public opinion had

swiftly changed, in some countries in a mere three or four

generations. Of course, in the time of Galileo and Newton

and even much later, there were stil some who objected,

who tried to prevent the new Sun-centered Universe from

becoming accepted, or even known. And there were many

who at least harbored secret reservations.

By the late twentieth century, just in case there were

any holdouts, we have been able to settle the matter

directly. We've been able to test whether we live in an

Earth-centered system with planets affixed to transparent

crystal spheres, or in a Sun-centered system with planets

control ed at a distance by the gravity of the Sun. We have,

for example, probed the planets with radar. When we

bounce a signal off a moon of Saturn, we receive no radio

echo from a nearer crystal sphere attached to Jupiter. Our

spacecraft arrive at their appointed destinations with

astonishing precision, exactly as predicted by Newtonian

gravitation. When our ships fly to Mars, say, their

instruments do not hear a tinkling sound or detect shards of

broken crystal as they crash through the "spheres" that—

according to the authoritative opinions that prevailed for

mil ennia—propel Venus or the Sun il their dutiful motions

about the central Earth.

When Voyager 1 scanned the Solar System from

beyond the outermost planet, it saw, just as Copernicus

and Galileo had said we would, the Sun in the middle and

the planets in concentric orbits about it. Far from being the

center of the Universe, the Earth is just one of the orbiting

dots. No longer confined to a single world, we are now able

to reach out to others and determine decisively what kind of

planetary system we inhabit.

EVERY OTHER PROPOSAL, and their number is legion, to

displace us from cosmic center stage has also been

resisted, in part for similar reasons. We seem to crave

privilege, merited not by our work, but by our birth, by the

mere fact that, say, we are humans and born on Earth. We

might cal it the anthropocentric—the "human-centered"—

conceit.

This conceit is brought close to culmination in the

notion that we are created in God's image: The Creator

and Ruler of the entire Universe looks just like me. My, what

a coincidence How convenient and satisfying! The sixth-

century-B.C. Green philosopher Xenophanes understood

the arrogance of the perspective:

"The Ethiopians make their gods black and snub-

nosed; the Thracians say theirs have blue eyes

and red hair . . . Yes, and if oxen and horses or

lions had hands, and could paint with their hands,

and produce works of art as men do, horses

would paint the forms of the gods like horses, and

oxen like oxen . . ."

Such attitudes were once described as "provincial"—

the naive expectation that the political hierarchies and

social conventions of an obscure province extend to a vast

empire composed of many different traditions and cultures;

that the familiar boondocks, our boondocks, are the center

of the world. The country bumpkins know almost nothing

about what else is possible. They fail to grasp the

insignificance of their province or the diversity of the

Empire. With ease, they apply their own standards and

customs to the rest of the planet. But plopped down in

Vienna, say, or Hamburg, or New York, rueful y they

recognize how limited their perspective has been. They

become "deprovincialized."

Modern science has been a voyage into the unknown,

with a lesson in humility waiting at every stop. Many

passengers would rather have stayed home.

C H A P

T E R 3

THE

GREAT

DEMOTIONS

[One philosopher] asserted that he knew the whole

secret . . . [H]e surveyed

the two celestial strangers from top to toe, and

maintained to their faces that

their persons, their worlds, their suns, and their

stars, were created solely for

the use of man. At this assertion our two travelers let

themselves fall against

each other, seized with a fit of . . .

inextinguishable laughter.

-VOLTAIRE, MICROMEGAS. A

PHILOSOPHICAL HISTORY (1752)

In the seventeenth century there was stil some hope that,

even if the Earth was not the center of the Universe, it might

be the only "world." But Galileo's telescope revealed that

"the Moon certainly does not possess a smooth and

polished surface" and that other worlds might look "just like

the face of the Earth itself." The Moon and the planets

showed unmistakably that they had as much claim to being

worlds as the Earth does—with mountains, craters,

atmospheres, polar ice caps, clouds, and, in the case of

Saturn, a dazzling, unheard-of set of circumferential rings.

After mil ennia of philosophical debate, the issue was

settled decisively in favor of "the plurality of worlds." They

might be profoundly different from our planet. None of them

might be as congenial for life. But the Earth was hardly the

only one.

This was the next in the series of Great Demotions,

downlifting experiences, demonstrations of our apparent

insignificance, wounds that science has, in its search for

Galileo's facts, delivered to human pride.

WELL, SOME HOPED, even if the Earth isn't at the center of the

Universe, the Sun is. The Sun is our Sun. So the Earth is

approximately at the center of the Universe. Perhaps

some of our pride could in this way be salvaged. But by the

nineteenth century, observational astronomy had made it

clear that the Sun is but one lonely star in a great self-

gravitating assemblage of suns cal ed the Milky Way

Galaxy. Far from being at the center of the Galaxy, our Sun

with its entourage of dim and tiny planets lies in an

undistinguished sector of an obscure spiral arm. We are

thirty thousand light years from the Center.

Well, our Milky Way is the only galaxy. The Milky

Way Galaxy is one of bil ions, perhaps hundreds of bil ions

of galaxies notable neither in mass nor in brightness nor in

how its stars are configured and arrayed. Some modern

deep sky photographs show more galaxies beyond the

Milky Way than stars within the Milky Way. Every one of

them is an island universe containing perhaps a hundred

bil ion suns. Such an image is a profound sermon on

humility.

Well, then, at least our Galaxy is at the center of the

Universe. No, this is wrong too. When the expansion of the

Universe was first discovered, many people natural y

gravitated to the notion that the Milky Way was at the center

of the expansion, and al the other galaxies running away

from us. We now recognize that astronomers on any galaxy

would see al the others running away . from them; unless

they were very careful, they would al conclude that they

were at the center of the Universe. There is, in fact, no

center to the expansion, no point of origin of the Big Bang,

at least not in ordinary three-dimensional space.

Well, even if there are hundreds of billions of

galaxies, each with hundreds of billions of stars, no other

star has planets. If there are n other planets beyond our

Solar System, perhaps there's no other life in the Universe.

Our uniqueness might then be saved. Sing planets are

smal and feebly shine by reflected sunlight, they're hard to

find. Although applicable technology is improving wit

breathtaking speed, even a giant world like Jupiter, orbiting

the nearest star, Alpha Centauri, would stil be difficult to

detect. Iii our ignorance, the geocentrists find hope.

There was once a scientific hypothesis—not just wel

received but prevailing—that supposed our solar system to

have formed through the near col ision of the ancient Sun

with another star; the gravitational tidal interaction pul ed

out tendrils of sunstuff that quickly condensed into planets.

Since space is mainly empty and near stel ar col isions

most rare, it was concluded that few other planetary

systems exist—perhaps only one, around that other star

that long ago co-parented the worlds of our solar system.

Early in my studies, I was amazed and disappointed that

such a view had ever been taken seriously, that for planets

of other stars, absence of evidence had been considered

evidence of absence.

Today we have firm evidence for at least three

planets orbiting an extremely dense star, the pulsar

designated B1257+12, about which I'l say more later. And

we've found, for more than half the stars with masses like

the Sun's, that early in their careers they're surrounded by

great disks of gas aid dust out of which planets seem to

form. Other planetary systems now look to be a cosmic

commonplace, maybe even worlds something like the

Earth. We should be able, in the next few decades, to

inventory at least the larger planets, if they exist, of

hundreds of nearby stars.

Well, if our position in space doesn't reveal our

special role, our position in time does: We've been in the

Universe since The Beginning (give or take a few days).

We've been given special responsibilities by the Creator.

It once seemed very reasonable to think of the Universe as

beginning just a little before our col ective memory is

obscured by the passage of time and the il iteracy of our

ancestors. General y speaking, that's hundreds or

thousands of years ago. Religions that purport to describe

the origin of the Universe often specify—implicitly or

explicitly—a date of origin of roughly such vintage, a

birthday for the world.

If you add up al the "begats" in Genesis, for

example, you get an age for the Earth: 6,000 years old, plus

or minus a little. The universe is said to be exactly as old as

the Earth. This is stil the standard of Jewish, Christian, and

Moslem fundamentalists and is clearly reflected in the

Jewish calendar.

But so young a Universe raises an awkward

question: How is it that there are astronomical objects more

than 6,000 light-years away? It takes light a year to travel a

light-year, 10,000 years to travel 10,000 light-years, and so

on. When we look at the center of the Milky Way Galaxy, the

light we see left its source 30,000 years ago. The nearest

spiral galaxy like our own, M31 in the constel ation

Andromeda, is 2 mil ion light-years away, so we are seeing

it as it was when the light from it set out on its long journey

to Earth—2 mil ion years ago. And when we observe

distant quasars 5 bil ion light-years away, we are seeing

them as they were 5 bil ion years ago, before the Earth was

formed. (They are, almost certainly, very different today.)

If, despite this, we were to accept the literal truth of

such religious books, how could we reconcile the data?

The only plausible conclusion, I think, is that God recently

made al the photons of light arriving on the Earth in such a

coherent format as to mislead generations of astronomers

into the misapprehension that there are such things as

galaxies and quasars, and intentional y driving them to the

spurious conclusion that the Universe is vast and old. This

is such a malevolent theology I stil have difficulty believing

that anyone, no matter how devoted to the divine inspiration

of any religious book, could seriously entertain it.

Beyond this, the radioactive dating of rocks, the

abundance of impact craters on many worlds, the evolution

of the stars, and the expansion of the Universe each

provides compel ing and independent evidence that our

Universe is many bil ions of years old—despite the

confident assertions of revered theologians that a world so

old directly contradicts the word of God, and that at any rate

information on the antiquity of the world is inaccessible

except to faith.[‡] These lines of evidence, as wel , would

have to be manufactured by a deceptive and malicious

deity—unless the world is much older than the literalists in

the Judeo-Christian-Islamic religion suppose. Of course, no

such problem arises for those many religious people who

treat the Bible and the Qur'an as historical and moral

guides and great literature, but who recognize that the

perspective of these scriptures on the natural world reflects

the rudimentary science of the time in which they were

written.

Ages rol ed by before the Earth began. More ages

wil run their course before it is destroyed. A distinction

needs to be drawn between how old the Earth is (around

4.5 bil ion years) and how old the Universe is (about 15

bil ion years since the Big Bang). The immense interval of

time between the origin of the Universe and our epoch was

two-thirds over before the Earth came to be. Some stars

and planetary systems are bil ions of years younger, others

bil ions of years older. But in Genesis, chapter 1, verse 1,

the Universe and the Earth are created on the same day.

The Hindu-Buddhist-Jain religion tends not to confound the

two events.

As for humans, we're latecomers. We appear in the

last instant of cosmic time. The history of the Universe til

now was 99.998 percent over before our species arrived

on the scene. In that vast sweep of aeons, we could not

have assumed any special responsibilities for our planet, or

life, or anything else. We were not here.

Well, if we can't find anything special about our

position or our epoch, maybe there's something special

about our motion. Newton and al the other great classical

physicists held that the velocity of the Earth in space

constituted a "privileged frame of reference." That's actual y

what it was cal ed. Albert Einstein, a keen critic of prejudice

and privilege al his life, considered this "absolute" physics

a remnant of an increasingly discredited Earth chauvinism.

It seemed to him that the laws of Nature must be the same

no matter what the velocity or frame of reference of the

observer. With this as his starting point, he developed the

Special Theory of Relativity. Its consequences are bizarre,

counter intuitive, and grossly contradict common sense—

but only at very high speeds. Careful and repeated

observations show that his justly celebrated theory is an

accurate description of how the world is made. Our

commonsense intuitions can be mistaken. Our preferences

don't count. We do not live in a privileged reference frame.

One consequence of special relativity is time

dilation—the slowing down of time as the observer

approaches light speed. You can stil find claims that time

dilation applies to watches and elementary particles—and,

presumably, to circadian and other rhythms in plants,

animals, and microbes—but not to human biological

clocks. Our species has been granted, it is suggested,

special immunity from the laws of Nature, which must

accordingly be able to distinguish deserving from

undeserving col ections of matter. (In fact, the proof Einstein

gave for special, relativity admits no such distinctions.) The

idea of humans as exceptions to relativity seems another

incarnation of the notion of special creation:

Well, even if our position, our epoch, our motion,

and our world are not unique, maybe we are. We're

different from the other animals. We're specially created.

The particular devotion of the Creator of the Universe is

evident in us. This position was passionately defended on

religious and other grounds. But in the middle nineteenth

century Charles Darwin showed convincingly how one

species can evolve into another by entirely natural

processes, which come down to the heartless business of

Nature saving the heredities that work and rejecting those

that don't. "Man in his arrogance thinks himself a great work

worthy [of] the interposition of a deity," Darwin wrote

telegraphical y in his notebook. "More humble and I think

truer to consider him created from animals." The profound

and intimate connections of humans with the other life

forms, on Earth have been compel ingly demonstrated in

the late twentieth century by the new science of molecular

biology.

IN EACH AGE the self-congratulatory chauvinisms are

chal enged in yet another arena of scientific debate—in this

century, for example, in attempts to understand the nature

of human sexuality, the existence of the unconscious mind,

and the fact that many psychiatric il nesses and character

"defects" have a molecular origin. But also:

Well, even if we're closely related to some of the

other animals, we're different—not just in degree, but in

kind—on

what

really

matters:

reasoning,

selfconsciousness, tool making, ethics, altruism, religion,

language, nobility of character. While humans, like al

animals, have traits that set them apart—otherwise, how

could we distinguish one species from another?—human

uniqueness has been exaggerated, sometimes grossly so.

Chimps reason, are self-conscious, make tools, show

devotion, and so on. Chimps and humans have 99.6

percent of their active genes in common. (Ann Druyan and I

run through the evidence in our book Shadows of Forgotten

Ancestors.)

In popular culture, the very opposite position is also

embraced, although it too is driven by human chauvinism

(plus a failure of the imagination): Children's stories and

cartoons make animals dress in clothes, live in houses, use

knives and forks, and speak. The three bears sleep in

beds. The owl and the pussycat go to sea in a beautiful

pea-green boat. Dinosaur mothers cuddle their young.

Pelicans deliver the mail. Dogs drive cars. A worm catches

a thief. Pets have human names. Dol s, nutcrackers, cups,

and saucers dance and have opinions. The dish runs away

with the spoon. In the Thomas the Tank Engine series, we

even have anthropomorphic locomotives and railway cars,

charmingly portrayed. No matter what we're thinking about,

animate or inanimate, we tend to invest it with human traits.

We can't help ourselves. The images come readily to mind.

Children are clearly fond of them.

When we talk about a "threatening" sky, a "troubled"

sea diamonds "resisting" being scratched, the Earth

"attracting" passing asteroid, or an atom being "excited,"

we are again drawn to a kind of animist worldview. We

reify. Some ancient level of our thinking endows inanimate

Nature with life, passions, and forethought.

The notion that the Earth is self-aware has lately

been growing at the fringes of the "Gaia" hypothesis. But

this was commonplace belief of both the ancient Greeks

and the earl Christians. Origen wondered whether "the

earth also, according to its own nature, is accountable for

some sin." A host of ancient scholars thought the stars

alive. This was also the position of Origen, of St. Ambrose

(the mentor of St. Augustine), and even, in a more qualified

form, of St. Thomas Aquinas. The Stoic philosophical

position on the Sun's nature was stated by Cicero, in the

first century B.C.: "Since the Sun resembles those fires

which are contained in the bodies of living creatures, the

Sun must also be alive."

Animist attitudes in general seem to have been

spreading recently. In a 1954 American survey, 75 percent

of people pol ed were wil ing to state that the Sun is not

alive; in 1989, only 30 percent would support so rash a

proposition. On whether an automobile tire can feel

anything, 90 percent of respondents denied it emotions in

1954, but only 73 percent in 1989.

We can recognize here a shortcoming—in some

circumstances serious—in our ability to understand the

world. Characteristical y, wil y-nil y, we seem compel ed to

project our own nature onto Nature. Although this may result

in a consistently distorted view of the world, it does have

one great virtue—projection is the essential precondition

for compassion.

Okay, maybe we're not much, maybe we're

humiliatingly related t0 apes, but at least we're the best

there is. God and angels aside, we're the only intelligent

beings in the Universe. One correspondent writes to me, "I

am as sure of this as anything in my experience. There is

no conscious life anywhere else in the Universe. Mankind

thus returns to its rightful position as center of the universe."

However, partly through the influence of science acid

science fiction, most people today, in the United States at

least, reject this proposition—for reasons essential y stated

by the ancient Greek philosopher Chrysippus: "For any

human being in existence to think that there is nothing in the

whole world superior to himself would be an insane piece

of arrogance."

But the simple fact is that we have not yet found

extraterrestrial life. We are in the earliest stages of looking.

The question is wide open. If I had to guess—especial y

considering our long sequence of failed I would guess that

the Universe is fil ed with beings far more intel igent, tar

more advanced than we are. But of course I might be

wrong. Such a conclusion is at best based on a plausibility

argument, derived from the numbers of planets, the ubiquity

of organic matter, the immense timescales available for

evolution, and so on. It is not a scientific demonstration. The

question is among the most fascinating in al of science. As

described in this book, we are just developing the tools to

treat it seriously.

What about the related matter of whether we are

capable of creating intel igences smarter than ourselves?

Computers routinely do mathematics that no unaided

human can manage, outperform world champions in

checkers and grand masters in chess, speak and

understand English and other languages, write presentable

short stories and musical compositions, learn from their

mistakes, and competently pilot ships, airplanes, and

spacecraft. Their abilities steadily improve. They're getting

smal er, faster, and cheaper. Each year, the tide of

scientific advance laps a little further ashore on the island of

human

intel ectual

uniqueness

with

its

embattled

castaways. If, at so early a stage in our technological

evolution, we have been able to go so far in creating

intel igence out of silicon and metal, what wil be possible in

the fol owing decades and centuries? What happens when

smart machines are able to manufacture smarter

machines?

PERHAPS THE CLEAREST INDICATION that the search for an

unmerited privileged position for humans wil never be

whol y abandoned is what in physics and astronomy is

cal ed the Anthropic Principle. It would be better named the

Anthropocentric Principle. It comes in various forms. The

"Weak" Anthropic Principle merely notes that if the laws of

Nature and the physical constants—such as the speed of

light, the electrical charge of the electron, the Newtonian

gravitational constant, or Planck's quantum mechanical

constant had been different, the course of events leading to

the origin of humans would never have transpired. Under

other laws and constants, atoms would not hold together,

stars would evolve too quickly to leave sufficient time for life

to evolve on nearby planets, the chemical elements of

which life is made would never have been generated, and

so on. Different laws, no humans.

There is no controversy about the Weak Anthropic

Principle: Change the laws and constants of Nature, if you

could, and a very different universe may emerge—in many

cases, a universe incompatible with life.[§] The mere fact

that we exist implies (but does not impose) constraints on

the laws of Nature. In contrast, the various "Strong"

Anthropic Principles go much farther; some of their

advocates come close to deducing that the laws of Nature

and the values of the physical constants were established

(don't ask how or by Whom) so that humans would

eventual y come to be. Almost al of the other possible

universes, they say, are inhospitable. In this way, the

ancient conceit that the Universe was made for us is

resuscitated.

To me it echoes Dr. Pangloss in Voltaire's Candide,

convinced that this world, with al its imperfections, is the

best possible. It sounds like playing my first hand of bridge,

winning, knowing that there are 54 bil ion bil ion bil ion (5.4

X 1028) possible other hands that I was equal y likely to

have been dealt . . . and then foolishly concluding that a god

of bridge exists and favors me, a god who arranged the

cards and the shuffle with my victory foreordained from The

Beginning. We do not know how many other winning hands

there are in the cosmic deck, how many other kinds of

universes, laws of Nature, and physical constants: that

could also lead to life and Intel igence and perhaps even

delusions of self-importance. Since we know next to

nothing about how the Universe was made—or even if it

was made—it's difficult to pursue these notions

productively.

Voltaire asked "Why is there anything?" Einstein's

formulation was to ask whether God had any choice in

formulation was to ask whether God had any choice in

creating the Universe. But if the Universe is infinitely old—if

the Big Bang some 15 bil ion years ago is only the most

recent cusp in an infinite series of cosmic contractions and

expansions—then it was never created and the question of

why it is as it is is rendered meaningless.

If, on the other hand, the Universe has a finite age,

why is it the way it is? Why wasn't it given a very different

character? Which laws of Nature go with which others? Are

there meta-laws specifying the connections? Can we

possibly discover them? Of al conceivable laws of gravity,

say, which ones can exist simultaneously with which

conceivable laws of quantum physics that determine the

very existence of macroscopic matter? Are al laws we can

think of possible, or is there only a restricted number that

can somehow be brought into existence? Clearly we have

not a glimmering of how to determine which laws of Nature

are "possible" and which are not. Nor do we have more

than the most rudimentary notion of what correlations of

natural laws are "permitted."

For example, Newton's universal law of gravitation

specifies that the mutual gravitational force attracting two

bodies towards each other is inversely proportional to the

square of how far they are apart. You move twice as far

from the center of the Earth and you weigh a quarter as

much; ten times farther and you weigh only a hundredth of

your ordinary weight; etc. It is this inverse square law that

permits the exquisite circular and el iptical orbits of planets

around the Sun, and moons around the planets—as wel as

the precision trajectories of our interplanetary spacecraft. If

r is the distance between the centers of two masses, we

say that the gravitational force varies as 1/ r 2.

But if this exponent were different—if the

gravitational law were 1/ r 4, say, rather than 1/ r 2 —then the

orbits would not close; over bil ions of revolutions, the

planets would spiral in and be consumed in the fiery depths

of the Sun, or spiral out and be lost to interstel ar space. If

the Universe were constructed with an inverse fourth power

law rather than an inverse square law, soon there would be

no planets for living beings to inhabit.

So of al the possible gravitational force laws, why

are we so lucky as to live in a universe sporting a law

consistent with life? First of course, we're so "lucky,"

because if we weren't, we wouldn't be here to ask the

question. It is no mystery that inquisitive beings who evolve

on planets can be found only in universes that admit

planets. Second, the inverse square law is not is the only

one consistent with stability over bil ions of years. Any

power law less steep than 1/ r 3 (1/ r 2 . 9 9 or 1/ r, for

example) wil keep a planet in the vicinity of a circular orbit

even if it's given a shove. We have a tendency to overlook

the possibility that other conceivable laws of Nature might

also be consistent with life.

But there's a further point: It's not arbitrary that we have

an inverse square law of gravitation. When Newton's theory

is understood in terms of the more encompassing general

theory of relativity, we recognize that the exponent of the

gravity law is 2 because the number of physical dimensions

we live in is 3. Al gravity laws aren't available, free for a

Creator's choosing. Even given an infinite number of three-

dimensional universes for some great god to tinker with,

the gravity law would always lave to be the law of the

inverse square. Newtonian gravity, we might say, is not a

contingent facet of our universe, but a necessary one.

In general relativity, gravity is due to the dimensionality

and curvature of space. When we talk about gravity we are

talking about local dimples in space-time. This is by no

means obvious and even affronts commonsense notions.

But when examined deeply, the ideas of gravity and mass

are not separate matters, but ramifications of the underlying

geometry of space-time.

I wonder if something like this doesn't apply

general y to al anthropic hypotheses. The laws or physical

constants on which our lives depend turn out to be

members of a class, perhaps even a vast class, of other

laws and other physical constants—but some of these are

also compatible with a kind of life. Often we do not (or

cannot) work through what those other universes al ow.

Beyond that, not every arbitrary choice of a law of Nature or

a physical constant may be available, even to a maker of

universes. Our understanding of which laws of Nature and

which physical constants are up for grabs is fragmentary at

best.

Moreover, we have no access to any of those

putative alternative universes. We have no experimental

method by which anthropic hypotheses may be tested.

Even if the existence of such universes were to fol ow firmly

from wel -established theories—of quantum mechanics or

gravitation, say—we could not be sure that there weren't

better theories that predict no alternative universes. Until

that time comes, if it ever does, it seems to me premature

to put faith in the Anthropic Principle as an argument for

human centrality or uniqueness.

Final y, even if the Universe were intentionally created

to al ow for the emergence of life or intel igence, other

beings may exist on countless worlds. If so, it would be cold

comfort to anthropocentrists that we inhabit one of the few

universes that al ow life and intel igence.

There is something stunningly narrow about how the

Anthropic Principle is phrased. Yes, only certain laws and

constants of nature are consistent with our kind of life. But

essential y the same laws and constants are required to

make a

rock. So why not talk about a Universe designed so rocks

could one day come to be, and strong and weak Lithic

Principles? If stones could philosophize, I imagine Lithic

Principles would be at the intel ectual frontiers.

There are cosmological models being formulated

today in which even the entire Universe is nothing special.

Andrei Linde, formerly of the Lebedev Physical Institute in

Moscow and now

at

Stanford

University,

has

incorporated

current

understanding of the strong and weak nuclear forces and

quantum physics into a new cosmological model. Linde

envisions a vast Cosmos, much larger than our Universe—

perhaps extending to infinity both in space and time—not

the paltry 15 bil ion light-years or so in radius and 15 bil ion

years in age which are the usual understanding. In this

Cosmos there is, as here, a kind of quantum fluff in which

tiny structures— much smal er than an electron—are

everywhere forming, reshaping, and dissipating; in which,

as here, fluctuations in absolutely empty space create pairs

of elementary particles—an electron and a positron, for

example. In the froth of quantum bubbles, the vast majority

remain submicroscopic. But a tiny fraction inflate, grow,

and achieve respectable universehood. They are so far

away from us, though—much farther than the 15 bil ion light-

years that is the conventional scale of our universe—that, if

they exist, they appear to be whol y inaccessible and

undetectable.

Most of these other universes reach a maximum

size and then col apse, contract to a point, and disappear

forever. Others may oscil ate. Stil others may expand

without limit. In different universes there wil be different

laws of nature. We live, Linde argues, in one such universe

—one in which the physics is congenial for growth, inflation,

expansion, galaxies, stars, worlds, life. We imagine our

universe to be unique, but it is one of an immense number

—perhaps an infinite number—of equal y valid, equal y

independent, equal y isolated universes. There wil be life in

some, and not in others. In this view the observable

Universe is just a newly formed backwater of a much

vaster, infinitely old, and whol y unobservable Cosmos. If

something like this is right, even our residual pride, pal id

as it must be, of living in the only universe is denied to

us.[**]

Maybe someday, despite current evidence, a

means wil be devised to peer into adjacent universes,

sporting very different laws of nature, and we wil see what

else is possible. Or perhaps inhabitants of adjacent

universes can peer into ours. Of course, in such

speculations we have far exceeded the bounds of

knowledge. But if something like Linde's Cosmos is true,

there

is—amazingly—stil

another

devastating

deprovincialization awaiting us.

Our powers are far from adequate to be creating

universes anytime soon. Strong Anthropic Principle ideas

are not amenable to proof (although Linde's cosmology

does have some testable features). Extraterrestrial life

aside, if self-congratulatory pretensions to centrality have

now retreated to such bastions impervious to experiment,

then the sequence of scientific battles with human

chauvinism would seem to have been, at least largely, won.

THE LONG-STANDING VIEW, as summarized by the philosopher

Immanuel Kant, that "without man . . . the whole of creation

would be a mere wilderness, a thing in vain, and have no

final end" is revealed to be self-indulgent fol y. A Principle

of Mediocrity seems to apply to al our circumstances. We

could not have known beforehand that the evidence would

be, so repeatedly and thoroughly, incompatible with the

proposition that human beings are at center stage in the

Universe. But most of the debates have now been settled

decisively in favor of a position that, however painful, can

be encapsulated in a single sentence: We have not been

given the lead in the cosmic drama.

Perhaps someone else has. Perhaps no one else

has. In either case, we have good reason for humility.

C H

A P T E R 4

A UNIVERSE

NOT MADE

FOR

US

US

The

Sea of Faith

Was once, too, at the full,

and round earth's shore

Lay like the folds

of a bright girdle furl'd.

But now I

only hear

Its melancholy,

long, withdrawing roar,

Retreating,

to the breath

Of the night-wind,

down the vast edges drear

And naked

shingles of the world.

—MATTHEW

ARNOLD, "DOVER BEACH" (1867)

What a beautiful sunset," we say, or "I'm up before

sunrise." No matter what the scientists al ege, in

everyday speech we often ignore their findings. We don't

talk about the Earth turning, but about the Sun rising and

setting. Try formulating it in Copernican language. Would

you say, "Bil y, be home by the time the Earth has rotated

enough so as to occult the Sun below the local horizon"?

Bil y would be long gone before you're finished. We haven't

been able even to find a graceful locution that accurately

the Heliocentric insight. We at the center and everything

else circling us is built into our languages; we teach it to our

children. We are unreconstructed geocentrists hiding

behind a Copernican veneer.[††]

In 1633 the Roman Catholic Church condemned Galileo

for teaching that the Earth goes around the Sun. Let's take

a closer look at this famous controversy. In the preface to

his book comparing the two hypotheses—an Earth-

centered and a Sun-centered universe—Galileo had

written,

The celestial phenomena will be examined, strengthening the

Copernican hypothesis until it might seem that this must triumph

absolutely.

And later in the book he confessed,

Nor can I ever sufficiently admire [Copernicus and his followers]; they

have through sheer force of intellect done such violence to their own

senses as to prefer what reason told them over what sensible

experience plainly showed them . . .

The Church declared, in its indictment of Galileo,

The doctrine that the earth is neither the center of the universe

nor immovable, but moves even with a daily rotation, is absurd,

and both psychologically and theologically false, and at the

least an error of faith.

Galileo replied,

The doctrine of the movements of the earth and the fixity of the

sun is condemned on the ground that the Scriptures speak in

many places of the sun moving and the earth standing still . . .

It is piously spoken that the Scriptures cannot lie. But none will

deny that they are frequently abstruse and their true meaning

difficult to discover, and more than the bare words signify. I

think that in the discussion of natural problems we ought to

begin not with the Scriptures, but with experiments and

demonstrations.

But in his recantation (June 22, 1633) Galileo was

made to say,

Having been admonished by the Holy Office entirely to

abandon the false opinion that the Sun was the center of the

universe and immovable, and that the Earth was not the center

of the same and that it moved . . . I have been . . . suspected of

heresy, that is, of having held and believed that the Sun is the

center of the universe and immovable, and that the Earth is not

the center of the same, and that it does move . . . 1 abjure with

a sincere heart and unfeigned faith, I curse and detest the

same errors and heresies, and generally all and every error

and sect contrary to the Holy Catholic Church.

It took the Church until 1832 to remove Galileo's work

from its list of books which Catholics were forbidden to

read at the risk of dire punishment of their immortal souls.

Pontifical disquiet with modern science has ebbed and

flowed since the time of Galileo. The high-water mark in

recent history is the 1864 Syl abus of Errors of Pius IX, the

pope who also convened the Vatican Council at which the

doctrine of papal infal ibility was, at his insistence, first

proclaimed. Here are a few excerpts:

Divine revelation is perfect and, therefore, it is not subject to continual

and indefinite progress in order to correspond with the progress of

human reason . . . No man is free to embrace and profess that

religion which he believes to be true, guided by the light of reason . . .

The Church has power to define dogmatically the religion of the

Catholic Church to be the only true religion . . . It is necessary even in

the present day that the Catholic religion shall be held as the only

religion of the state, to the exclusion of all other forms of worship . . .

The civil liberty of every mode of worship, and full power given to all of

openly and publicly manifesting their opinions and their ideas

conduce more easily to corrupt the morals and minds of the people .

. . The Roman Pontiff cannot and ought not to reconcile himself or

agree with, progress, liberalism and modern civilization.

To its credit, although belatedly and reluctantly, the

Church in 1992 repudiated its denunciation of Galileo. It stil

cannot quite bring itself, though, to see the significance of

its opposition. In a 1992 speech Pope John Paul I argued,

From the beginning of the Age of Enlightenment down to our

own day, the Galileo case has been a sort of "myth" in which

the image fabricated out of the events is quite far removed from

reality. In this perspective, the Galileo case was a symbol of the

Catholic Church's supposed rejection of scientific progress, or

of "dogmatic" obscurantism opposed to the free search for

truth.

But surely the Holy Inquisition ushering the elderly and

infirm Galileo in to inspect the instruments of torture in

the dungeons of the Church not only admits but

requires just such an interpretation. This was not mere

scientific caution and restraint, a reluctance to shift a

paradigm until compel ing evidence, such as the

annual paral ax, was available. This was fear of

discussion and debate. Censoring alternative views

and threatening to torture their proponents betray a

lack of faith in the very doctrine and parishioners that

are ostensibly being protected. Why were threats and

Galileo's house arrest needed? Cannot truth defend

itself in its confrontation with error?

The Pope does, though, go on to add:

The error of the theologians of the time, when they maintained the

centrality of the earth, was to think that our understanding of the

physical world's structure was in soiree way imposed by the literal

sense of Sacred Scriptures.

Here indeed considerable progress has been made—

although proponents of fundamentalist faiths wil be

distressed to hear from the Pontiff that Sacred Scripture is

not always literal y true.

But if the Bible is not everywhere literal y true, which parts

are divinely inspired and which are merely fal ible and

human? As soon as we admit that there are scriptural

mistakes (or concessions to the ignorance of the times),

then how can the Bible be an inerrant guide to ethics and

morals? Might sects and individuals now accept as

authentic the parts of the Bible they like, and reject those

that are inconvenient or burdensome? Prohibitions against

murder, say, are essential for a society to function, but if

divine retribution for murder is considered implausible,

won't more people think they can get away with it?

Many felt that Copernicus and Galileo were up to no

good and erosive of the social order. Indeed any

chal enge

from any source, to the literal truth of the Bible might have

such consequences. We can readily see how science

began to make people nervous. Instead of criticizing those

who perpetuated the myths, public rancor was directed at

those who discredited them.

OUR ANCESTORS UNDERSTOOD origins by extrapolating from

their own experience. How else could they have done it?

So the Universe was hatched from a cosmic egg, or

conceived in the sexual congress of a mother god and a

father god, or was a kind of product of the Creator's

workshop—perhaps the latest of many flawed attempts.

And the Universe was not much bigger than we see, and

not much older than our written or oral records, and

nowhere very different from places that we know.

We've tended in our cosmologies to make things

familiar. Despite al our best efforts, we've not been very

inventive. In the West, Heaven is placid and fluffy, and Hel

is like the inside of a volcano. In many stories, both realms

are governed by dominance hierarchies headed by gods or

devils. Monotheists talked about the king of kings. In every

culture we imagined something like our own political

system running the Universe. Few found the similarity

suspicious.

Then science came along and taught us that we are not

the measure of al things, that there are wonders

unimagined, that the Universe is not obliged to conform to

what we consider comfortable or plausible. We have

learned something about the idiosyncratic nature of our

common sense. Science has carried human self-

consciousness to a higher level. This is surely a rite of

passage, a step towards maturity. It contrasts starkly with

the childishness and narcissism of our pre-Copernican

notions.

But why should we want to think that the Universe was

made for us? Why is the idea so appealing? Why do we

nurture it? Is our self-esteem so precarious that nothing

short of a universe custom-made for us wil do?

Of course it appeals to our vanity. "What a man desires,

he also imagines to be true," said Demosthenes. "The light

of faith makes us see what we believe," cheerful y admitted

St. Thomas Aquinas. But I think there may be something

else. There's a kind of ethnocentrism among primates. To

whichever little group we happen to be born, we owe

passionate love and loyalty. Members of other groups are

beneath contempt, deserving of rejection and hostility. That

both groups are. of the same species, that to an outside

observer they are virtual y indistinguishable, makes no

difference. This is certainly the pattern among the

chimpanzees, our closest relatives in the animal kingdom.

Ann Druyan and I have described how this way of viewing

the world may have made enormous evolutionary sense a

few mil ion years ago, however dangerous it has become

today. Even members of hunter-gatherer groups—as far

from the technological feats of our present global

civilization as it is possible for humans to be—solemnly

describe their little band, whichever it is, as "the people."

Everyone else is something different, something less than

human.

If this is our natural way of viewing the world, then it

should occasion no surprise that every time we make a

naive judgment about our place in the Universe—one

untempered by careful and skeptical scientific examination

—we almost always opt for the centrality of our group and

circumstance. We want to believe, moreover, that these are

objective facts, and not our prejudices finding a sanctioned

vent.

So it's not much fun to have a gaggle of scientists

incessantly haranguing us with "You're ordinary, you're

unimportant your privileges are undeserved, there's nothing

special about you." Even unexcitable people might, after a

while, grow annoyed at this incantation and those who insist

on chanting it. It almost seems that the scientists are getting

some weird satisfaction out of putting humans down. Why

can't they find a way in which we're superior? Lift our

spirits! Exalt us! In such debates science, with its mantra of

discouragement, feels cold and remote, dispassionate,

detached, unresponsive to human needs.

And, again, if we're not important, not central, not the

apple of God's eye, what is implied for our theological y

based moral codes? The discovery of our true bearings in

the Cosmos was resisted for so long and to such a degree

that many traces of the debate remain, sometimes with the

motives of the geocentrists laid bare. Here, for example, is

a revealing unsigned commentary in the British review The

Spectator in 1892:

[I]t is certain enough that the discovery of the heliocentric motion of

the planets which reduced our earth to its proper "insignificance" in

the solar system, did a good deal to reduce to a similar but far from

proper "insignificance" the moral principles by which the

predominant races of the earth had hitherto been guided and

restrained. Part of this effect was no doubt due to the evidence

afforded that the physical science of various inspired writers was

erroneous instead of being infallible,-a conviction which unduly

shook the confidence felt even in their moral and religious teaching.

But a good deal of it was due only to the mere sense of

"insignificance" with which man has contemplated himself, since he

has discovered that he inhabits nothing but a very obscure corner of

the universe, instead of the central world round which sun, moon,

and stars alike revolved. There can be no doubt that man may feel

himself, and has often felt himself, a great deal too insignificant to be

the object of any particular divine training or care. If the earth be

regarded as a sort of ant-hill, and the life and death of human beings

as the life and death of so many ants which run into and out of so

many holes in search of food and sunlight, it is quite certain that no

adequate importance will be attached to the duties of human life, and

that a profound fatalism and hopelessness, instead of new

hopefulness, will attach to human effort . . .

[F]or the present at least, our horizons are quite vast enough . . . ;

till we can get used to the infinite horizons we already have, and not

lose our balance so much as we usually do in contemplating them,

the yearning for still wider horizons is premature.

WHAT DO WE REALLY WANT from philosophy and religion?

Pal iatives? Therapy? Comfort? Do we want reassuring

fables or an understanding of our actual circumstances?

Dismay that the Universe does not conform to our

preferences seems childish. You might think that grown-ups

would be ashamed to put such disappointments into print.

The fashionable way of doing this is not to blame the

Universe—which seems truly pointless—but rather to

blame the means by which we know the Universe, namely

science.

George Bernard Shaw, in the preface to his play St.

Joan, described a sense of science preying on our

credulity, forcing on us an alien worldview, intimidating

belief:

In the Middle Ages, people believed that the Earth was flat, for

which they had at least the evidence of their senses: we

believe it to be round, not because as many as one per cent of

us could give the physical reason for so quaint a belief, but

because modern science has convinced us that nothing that is

obvious is true, and that everything that is magical, improbable,

extraordinary, gigantic, microscopic, heartless, or outrageous

is scientific.

A more recent and very instructive example is

Understanding t h e Present: Science and the Soul of

Modern Man, by Bryan Appleyard, a British journalist. This

book makes explicit what many people feel, al over the

world, but are too embarrassed to say. Appleyard's candor

is refreshing. He is a true believer and wil not let us slough

over the contradictions between modern science and

traditional religion:

"Science has taken away our religion," he laments. And

what sort of religion is it that he longs for? One in which "the

human race was the point, the heart, the final cause of the

whole system. It placed our selves definitively upon the

universal map." . . . "We were the end, the purpose, the

rational axle around which the great aetherian shel s

rotated." He longs for "the universe of Catholic orthodoxy"

in which "the cosmos is shown to be a machine constructed

around the drama of salvation"—by which Appleyard

means that, despite explicit orders to the contrary, a

woman and a man once ate of an apple, and that this act of

insubordination transformed the Universe into a contrivance

for operant-conditioning their remote descendants.

By contrast, modern science "presents us as accidents.

We are caused by the cosmos, but we are not the cause of

it. Modem man is not final y anything, he has no role in

creation." Science is "spiritual y corrosive, burning away

ancient authorities and traditions. It cannot real y co-exist

with anything." . . . "Science, quietly and inexplicitly, is

talking us into abandoning our selves, our true selves." It

reveals "the mute, alien spectacle of nature." . . . "Human

beings cannot live with such a revelation. The only morality

left is that of the consoling lie." Anything is better than

grappling with the unbearable burden of being tiny.

In a passage reminiscent of Plus IX, Appleyard even

decries the fact that "a modern democracy can be

expected to include a number of contradictory religious

faiths which are obliged to agree on a certain limited

number of general injunctions, but no more. They must not

burn each other's places of worship, but they may deny,

even abuse each other's God. This is the effective,

scientific way of proceeding."

But what is the alternative? Obdurately to pretend to

certainty in an uncertain world? To adopt a comforting

belief system, no matter how out of kilter with the facts it is?

If we don't know what's real, how can we deal with reality?

For practical reasons, we cannot live too much in

fantasyland. Shal we censor one another's religions and

burn down one another's places of worship? How can we

be sure which of the thousands of human belief systems

should become unchal enged, ubiquitous, mandatory?

These quotations betray a failure of nerve before the

Universe its grandeur and magnificence, but especial y its

indifference. Science has taught us that, because we have

a talent for deceiving ourselves, subjectivity may not freely

reign. This is one reason Appleyard so mistrusts science: It

seems too reasoned, measured, and impersonal. Its

conclusions derive from the interrogation of Nature, and are

not in al cases predesigned to satisfy our wants. Appleyard

deplores moderation. He yearns for inerrant doctrine,

release from the exercise of judgment, and an obligation to

believe but not to question. He has not grasped human

fal ibility. He recognizes no need to institutionalize error-

correcting machinery either in our social institutions or in

our view of the Universe.

This is the anguished cry of the infant when the Parent

does not come. But most people eventual y come to grips

with reality, and with the painful absence of parents who wil

absolutely guarantee that no harm befal s the little ones so

long as they do what they are told. Eventual y most people

find ways to accommodate to the Universe—especial y

when given the tools to think straight.

"Al that we pass on to our children" in the scientific age,

Appleyard complains, "is the conviction that nothing is true,

final or enduring, including the culture from which they

sprang." How right he is about the inadequacy of our

legacy. But would it be enriched by adding baseless

certainties? He scorns "the pious hope that science and

religion are independent realms which can easily be

separated." Instead, "science, as it is now, is absolutely not

compatible with religion."

But isn't Appleyard real y saying that some religions now

find it difficult to make unchal enged pronouncements on

the nature of the world that are straight-out false? We

recognize that even revered religious leaders, the products

of their time as we are of ours, may have made mistakes.

Religions contradict one another on smal matters, such as

whether we should put on a hat or take one off on entering a

house of worship, or whether we should eat beef and

eschew pork or the other way around, al the way to the

most central issues, such as whether there are no gods,

one God, or many gods.

Science has brought many of us to that state in which

Nathaniel Hawthorne found Herman Melvil e: "He can

neither believe, nor be comfortable in his unbelief." Or

Jean-Jacques Rousseau: "They had not persuaded me, but

they had troubled me. Their arguments had shaken me

without ever convincing me . . . It is hard to prevent oneself

from believing what one so keenly desires." As the belief

systems taught by the secular and religious authorities are

undennined, respect for authority in general probably does

erode. The lesson is clear: Even politics] leaders must be

wary of embracing false doctrine. This is not a failing of

science, but one of its graces.

Of course, worldview consensus is comforting, while

clashes of opinion may be unsettling, and demand more of

us. But unless we insist, against al evidence, that our

ancestors were perfect, the advance of knowledge requires

us to unravel and then restitch the consensus they

established.

In some respects, science has far surpassed religion in

delivering awe. How is it that hardly any major religion has

looked at science and concluded, "This is better than we

thought! The Universe is much bigger than our prophets

said, grander, more subtle, more elegant. God must be

even greater than we dreamed"? Instead they say, "No, no,

no! My god is a little god, and I want him to stay that way." A

religion, old or new, that stressed the magnificence of the

Universe as revealed by modern science might be able to

draw forth reserves of reverence and awe hardly tapped by

the conventional faiths. Sooner or later, such a religion wil

emerge.

IF YOU LIVED two or three mil ennia ago, there was no

shame in holding that the Universe was made for us. It

was an appealing thesis consistent with everything we

knew; it was what the most learned among us taught

without qualification. But we have found out much since

then. Defending such a position today amounts to

wil ful disregard of the evidence, and a flight from self-

knowledge.

Stil , for many of us, these deprovincializations rankle.

Even if they do not ful y cant' the day, they erode confidence

—unlike the happy anthropocentric certitudes, rippling with

social utility, of an earlier age. We long to be here for a

purpose, even though, despite much self-deception, none

is evident. "The meaningless absurdity of life," wrote Leo

Tolstoy, "is the only incontestable knowledge accessible to

man." Our time is burdened under the cumulative weight of

successive debunkings of our conceits: We're Johnny-

come-latelies. We live in the cosmic boondocks. We

emerged from microbes and muck. Apes are our cousins.

Our thoughts and feelings are not ful y under our own

control. There may be much smarter and very different

beings elsewhere. And on top of al this, we're making a

mess of our planet and becoming a danger to ourselves.

The trapdoor beneath our feet swings open. We find

ourselves in bottomless free fal . We are lost in a great

darkness, and there's no one to send out a search

party. Given so harsh a reality, of course we're

tempted to shut our eyes and pretend that we're safe

and snug at home, that the fal is only a bad dream.

We lack consensus about our place in the Universe.

There is no general y agreed upon long-term vision of

the goal of our species—other than, perhaps, simple

survival. Especial y when times are hard, we become

desperate for encouragement, unreceptive to the litany

of great demotions and dashed hopes, and much

more wil ing to hear that we're special, never mind if

the evidence is paper-thin. If it takes a little myth and

ritual to get us through a night that seems endless, who

among us cannot sympathize and understand?

But if our objective is deep knowledge rather than

shal ow reassurance, the gains from this new

perspective far outweigh the losses. Once we

overcome our fear of being tiny, we find ourselves on

the threshold of a vast and awesome Universe that

utterly dwarfs—in time, in space, and in potential—the

tidy anthropocentric proscenium of our ancestors. We

gaze across bil ions of light-years of space to view the

Universe shortly after the Big Bang, and plumb the fine

structure of matter. We peer down into the core of our

planet, and the blazing interior of our star. We read the

genetic language in which is written the diverse skil s

and propensities of every being on Earth. We uncover

hidden chapters in the record of our own origins, and

with some anguish better understand our nature and

prospects. We invent and refine agriculture, without

which almost al of us would starve to death. We create

medicines and vaccines that save the lives of bil ions.

We communicate at the speed of light, and whip

around the Earth in an hour and a half. We have sent

dozens of ships to more than seventy worlds, and four

spacecraft to the stars. We are right to rejoice in our

accomplishments, to be proud that our species has

been able to see so far, and to judge our merit in part

by the very science that has so deflated our

pretensions.

To our ancestors there was much in Nature to be

afraid of—lightning, storms, earthquakes, volcanos,

plagues, drought, long winters. Religions arose in part

as attempts to propitiate and control, if not much to

understand, the disorderly aspect of Nature. The

scientific revolution permitted us to glimpse an

underlying ordered Universe in which there was a

literal harmony of the worlds (Johannes Kepler's

phrase). If we understand Nature, there is a prospect

of control ing it or at least mitigating the harm it may

bring. In this sense, science brought hope.

Most of the great deprovincializing debates were entered

into with no thought for their practical implications.

Passionate and curious humans wished to understand their

actual circumstances, how unique or pedestrian they and

their world are, their ultimate origins and destinies, how the

Universe works. Surprisingly, some of these debates have

yielded the most profound practical benefits. The very

method of mathematical reasoning that Isaac Newton

introduced to explain the motion of the planets around the

Sun has led to most of the technology Of our modern world.

The Industrial Revolution, for al its shortcomings, is stil the

global model of how an agricultural nation can emerge from

poverty.

These

debates

have

bread-and-butter

consequences.

It might have been otherwise. It might have been that the

balance lay elsewhere, that humans by and large did not

want to yaw about a disquieting Universe, that we were

unwil ing to hermit chal enges to the prevailing wisdom.

Despite determined resistance in every age, it is very much

to our credit that we have al owed ourselves to fol ow the

evidence, to draw conclusions that at first seem daunting: a

Universe so much larger and older that our personal and

historical experience is dwarfed and humbled, a Universe

in which, every day, suns are born and worlds obliterated, a

Universe in which humanity, newly arrived, clings to an

obscure clod of matter.

How much more satisfying had we been placed in a

garden custom-made for us, its other occupants put there

for us to use as we saw fit. There is a celebrated story in

the Western tradition like this, except that not quite

everything was there for us. There was one particular tree

of which we were not to partake, a tree of knowledge.

Knowledge and understanding and wisdom were forbidden

to us in this story. We were to be kept ignorant. But we

couldn't help ourselves. We were starving for knowledge—

created hungry, you might say. This was the origin of al our

troubles. In particular, it is why we no longer live in a

garden: We found out too much. So long as we were

incurious and obedient, I imagine, we could console

ourselves with our importance and centrality, and tel

ourselves that we were the reason the Universe was made.

As we began to indulge our curiosity, though, to explore, to

learn how the Universe real y is, we expel ed ourselves

from Eden. Angels with a flaming sword were set as

sentries at the gates of Paradise to bar our return. The

gardeners became exiles and wanderers. Occasional y we

mourn that lost world, but that, it seems to me, is maudlin

and sentimental. We could not happily have remained

ignorant forever.

There is in this Universe much of what seems to he

design. Every time we come upon it, we breathe a sigh of

relief. We are forever hoping to find, or at least safely

deduce, a Designer. But instead, we repeatedly discover

that natural processes—col isional selection of worlds, say,

or natural selection of gene pools, or even the convection

pattern in a pot of boiling water—can extract order out of

chaos, and deceive us into deducing purpose where there

is none. In everyday life, we often sense—in the bedrooms

of teenagers, or in national politics—that chaos is natural,

and order imposed from above. While there are deeper

regularities in the Universe than the simple circumstances

we general y describe as orderly, al that order, simple and

complex, seems to derive from laws of Nature established

at the Big Bang (or earlier), rather than as a consequence

of belated intervention by an imperfect deity. "God is to be

found in the details" is the famous dictum of the German

scholar Abu Warburg. But, amid much elegance and

precision, the details of life and the Universe also exhibit

haphazard, jury-rigged arrangements and much poor

planning. What shal we make of this: an edifice abandoned

early in construction by the architect?

The evidence, so far at least and laws of Nature

aside, does not require a Designer. Maybe there is

one hiding, maddeningly unwil ing to be revealed.

Sometimes it seems a very slender hope.

The significance of our lives and our fragile planet is

then determined only by our own wisdom and courage.

We are the custodians of life's meaning. We long for a

Parent to care for us, to forgive us our errors, to save

us from our childish mistakes. But knowledge is

preferable to ignorance. Better by far to embrace the

hard truth than a reassuring fable.

If we crave some cosmic purpose, then let us find

ourselves a worthy goal.

C H A

P T E R 5

IS THERE

INTELLIGENT

LIFE ON EARTH?

They journeyed a long time and found

nothing. At length they discerned

a small light, which was the Earth . . . [But]

they could not find the

smallest reason to suspect that

we and our fellow—citizens

of this globe

have the honor to exist.

—VOLTAIRE, MICROMEGAS.

A

PHILOSOPHICAL HISTORY (1752)

There are places, in and around our great cities, where the natural

world has all but disappeared. You can make out streets and sidewalks,

autos, parking garages, advertising billboards, monuments of glass and

steel, but not a tree or a blade of grass or any animal—besides, of course,

the humans. There are lots of humans. Only when you look straight up

through the skyscraper canyons can you make out a star or a patch of blue

—reminders of what was there long before humans came to be. But the

bright lights of the big cities bleach out the stars, and even that patch of

blue is sometimes gone, tinted brown by industrial technology.

It's not hard, going to work every day in such a place, to be

impressed with ourselves. How we've transformed the Earth for our

benefit and convenience! But a few hundred miles up or down there

are no humans. Apart from a thin film of life at the very surface of the

Earth, an occasional intrepid spacecraft, and some radio static, our

impact on the Universe is nil. It knows nothing of us.

YOU'RE AN ALIEN EXPLORER entering the Solar System after a

long journey through the blackness of interstel ar space.

You examine the planets of this humdrum star from afar—a

pretty handful, some gray, some blue, some red, some

yel ow. You're interested in what kinds of worlds these are,

whether their environments are static or changing, and

especial y whether there are life and intel igence. You have

no prior knowledge of the Earth. You've just discovered its

existence.

There's a galactic ethic, let's imagine: Look but don't

touch. You can fly by these worlds; you can orbit them; but

you are strictly forbidden to land. Under such constraints,

could you figure out what the Earth's environment is like and

whether anyone lives there?

As you approach, your first impression of the whole Earth

is white clouds, white polar caps, brown continents, and

some bluish substance that covers two thirds of the surface.

When you take the temperature of this world from the

infrared radiation it emits, you find that most latitudes are

above the freezing point of water, while the polar caps are

below freezing. Water is a very abundant material in the

Universe; polar caps made of solid water would be a

reasonable guess, as wel as clouds of solid and liquid

water.

You might also he tempted by the idea that the blue

stuff is enormous quantities—kilometers deep—of liquid

water. The suggestion is bizarre, though, at least as far as

this solar system is concerned, because surface oceans of

liquid water exist nowhere else. When you look in the

visible and near-infrared spectrum for tel tale signatures of

chemical composition, sure enough you discover water ice

in the polar caps, and enough water vapor in the air to

account for the clouds; this is also just the right amount that

must exist because of evaporation if the oceans are in fact

made of liquid water. The bizarre hypothesis is confirmed.

The spectrometers further reveal that the air on this world

is one fifth oxygen, O2. No other planet in the Solar System

has anything close to so much oxygen. Where does it al

come from? The intense ultraviolet light from the Sun

breaks water, H20, down into oxygen and hydrogen, and

hydrogen, the lightest gas, quickly escapes to space. This

is a source of O2, certainly, but it doesn't easily account for

so much oxygen.

Another possibility is that ordinary visible light, which the

Sun pours out in vast amounts, is used on Earth to break

water apart—except that there's no known way to do this

without life. There would have to be plants, life-forms

colored by a pigment that strongly absorbs visible light, that

knows how to split a water molecule by saving up the

energy of two photons of light, that retains the H and

excretes the O, and that uses the hydrogen thus liberated to

synthesize organic molecules. The plants would have to be

spread over much of the planet. Al this is asking a lot. If

you're a good skeptical scientist, so much Oz would not be

proof of life. But it certainly might be cause for suspicion.

With al that oxygen you're not surprised to discover

ozone (O3) in the atmosphere, because ultraviolet light

makes ozone out of molecular oxygen (O2). The ozone then

absorbs dangerous ultraviolet radiation. So if the oxygen is

due to life, there's a curious sense in which the life is

protecting itself. But this life "night be mere photosynthetic

plants. A high level of intel igence is not implied.

When you examine the continents more closely, you find

there are, crudely speaking, two kinds of regions. One

shows the spectrum of ordinary rocks and minerals as

found on many worlds. The other reveals something

unusual: a material, covering vast areas, that strongly

absorbs red light. (The Sun, of course, shines in light of al

colors, with a peak in the yel ow.) This pigment might be

just the agent needed if ordinary visible light is being used

to break water apart and account for the oxygen in the air.

It's another hint, this time a little stronger, of life, not a bug

here and there, but a planetary surface overflowing with life.

The pigment is in fact chlorophyl : It absorbs blue light as

wel as red, and is responsible for the fact that plants are

green. What you're seeing is a densely vegetated planet.

So the Earth is revealed to possess three properties

unique at least in this solar system—oceans, oxygen, life.

It's hard not to think they're related, the oceans being the

sites of origin, and the oxygen the product, of abundant life.

When you look careful y at the infrared spectrum of the

Earth, you discover the minor constituents of the air. In

addition to water vapor, there's carbon dioxide (CO2),

methane (CH4), and other gases that absorb the heat that

the Earth tries to radiate away to space at night. These

gases warm the planet. Without them, the Earth would

everywhere be below the freezing point of water. You've

discovered this world's greenhouse effect.

Methane and oxygen together in the same atmosphere is

peculiar. The laws of chemistry are very clear: In an excess

of O2, CH4 should be entirely converted into H2O and

CO2, The process is so efficient that not a single molecule

in al the Earth's atmosphere should be methane. Instead,

you find that one out of every mil ion molecules is methane,

ail immense discrepancy. What could it mean?

The only possible explanation is that methane is being

injected into the Earth's atmosphere so quickly that its

chemical reaction with Oz can't keep pace. Where does al

this methane come from? Maybe it seeps out of the deep

interior of the Earth—but quantitatively this doesn't seem to

work, and Mars and Venus don't have anything like this

much methane. The only alternatives are biological, a

conclusion that makes no assumptions about the chemistry

of life, or what it looks like, but fol ows merely from how

unstable methane is in an oxygen atmosphere. In fact, the

methane arises from such sources as bacteria in bogs, the

cultivation of rice, the burning of vegetation, natural gas

from oil wel s, and bovine flatulence. In an oxygen

atmosphere, methane is a sign of life.

That the intimate intestinal activities of cows should be

detectable

from

interplanetary

space

is

a

little

disconcerting, especial y when so much of what we hold

dear is not. But an alien scientist flying by the Earth would,

at this point, be unable to deduce bogs, rice, fire, oil, or

cows. Just life.

Al the signs of life that we've discussed so far are due to

comparatively simple forms (the methane in the rumens of

cows is generated by bacteria that homestead there). Had

your spacecraft flown by the Earth a hundred mil ion years

ago, in the age of the dinosaurs when there were no

humans and no technology, you would stil have seen

oxygen and ozone, they chlorophyl pigment, and far too

much methane. At present, though, your instruments are

finding signs not just of life, but of high technology—

something that couldn't possibly have been detected even

a hundred years ago:

You are detecting a particular kind of radio wave

emanating from Earth. Radio waves don't necessarily

signify life and intel igence Many natural processes

generate them. You've already found radio emissions from

other, apparently uninhabited worlds—generated by

electrons trapped in the strong magnetic fields of planets,

by chaotic motions at the shock front that separates these

magnetic fields from the interplanetary magnetic field, and

by lightning. (Radio "whistlers" usual y sweep from high

notes to low, and then begin again.) Some of these radio

emissions are continuous; some come in repetitive bursts;

some last a few minutes and then disappear.

But this is different: A portion of the radio transmission

from Earth is at just the frequencies where radio waves

begin to leak out of the planet's ionosphere, the electrical y

charged region above the stratosphere that reflects and

absorbs radio waves. There is a constant central frequency

for each transmission, added to which is a modulated

signal (a complex sequence of ons and offs). No electrons

in magnetic fields, no shock waves, no lightning discharges

can generate something like this. Intel igent life seems to

be the only possible explanation. Your conclusion that the

radio transmission is due to technology on Earth holds no

matter what the ons and offs mean: You don't have to

decode the message to be sure it is a message. (This

signal is real y, let us suppose, communications from the

U.S. Navy to its distant nuclear-armed submarines.)

So, as an alien explorer, you would know that at least one

species on Earth has achieved radio technology. Which

one is it? The beings that make methane? Those that

generate oxygen? The ones whose pigment colors the

landscape green? Or somebody else, somebody more

subtle, someone not otherwise detectable to a spacecraft

plummeting by? To search for this technological species,

you might want to examine the Earth at finer and finer

resolution—seeking, if not the beings themselves, at least

their artifacts.

You look first with a modest telescope, so the finest

detail you can resolve is one or two kilometers across. You

can make out no monumental architecture, no strange

formations, no unnatural reworking of the landscape, no

signs of life. You see a dense atmosphere in motion. The

abundant water must evaporate and then rain back down.

Ancient impact craters, apparent on the Earth's nearby

Moon, are almost whol y absent. There must, then, be a set

of processes whereby new land is created and then eroded

away in much less time than the age of this world. Running

water is implicated. As you look with finer and finer

definition you find mountain ranges, river val eys, and many

other indications that the planet is geological y active.

There are also odd places surrounded by vegetation, but

which are themselves denuded of plants. They look like

discolored smudges on the landscape.

When you examine the Earth at about 100-meter

resolution, everything changes. The planet is revealed to be

covered with straight lines, squares, rectangles, circles—

sometimes huddling along river banks or nestling on the

lower slopes of mountains, sometimes stretching over

plains, but rarely in deserts or high mountains, and

absolutely never in the oceans. Their regularity, complexity,

and distribution would be hard to explain except by life and

intel igence, although a deeper understanding of function

and purpose might be elusive. Perhaps you would conclude

only that the dominant life-forms have a simultaneous

passion for territoriality and Euclidean geometry. At this

resolution you could not see them, much less know them.

Many of the devegetated smudges are revealed to have

an underlying checkerboard geometry. These are the

planets cities. Over much of the landscape, and not just in

the cities, there is a profusion of straight lines, squares,

rectangles, circles. The dark smudges of the cities are

revealed to be highly geometrized, with only a few patches

of vegetation—themselves with highly regular boundaries—

left intact. There are occasional triangles, and in one city

there is even a pentagon.

When you take pictures at a meter resolution or better,

you find that the crisscrossing straight lines within the cities

and the long straight lines that join them with other cities are

fil ed with streamlined, multicolored beings a few meters in

length, politely running one behind the other, in long, slow

orderly procession. They are very patient. One stream of

beings stops so another stream can continue at right

angles. Periodical y, the favor is returned. At night, they turn

on two bright lights in front so they can see where they're

going. Some, a privileged few, go into little houses when

their workday is done and retire for the night. Most are

homeless and sleep in the streets.

At last! You've detected the source of al the

technology. the dominant life-forms on the planet. The

streets of the cities and the roadways of the

countryside are evidently built for their benefit. You

might believe that you were real y beginning to

understand life on Earth. And perhaps you'd be right.

If the resolution improved just a little further, you'd

discover tiny parasites that occasional y enter and exit the

dominant organisms. They play some deeper role, though,

because a stationary dominant organism wil often start up

again just after it's reinfected by a parasite, and stop again

just before the parasite is expel ed. This is puzzling. But no

one said life on Earth would be easy to understand.

Al the images you've taken so far are in reflected

sunlight—that is, on the day side of the planet.

Something most interesting is revealed when you

photograph the Earth at light: The planet is lit up. The

brightest region, near the Arctic Circle, is il uminated

by the aurora borealis—generated not by life , but by

electrons and protons from the Sun, beamed down by

the Earth's magnetic field. Everything else you see is

due to life. The lights recognizably outline the same

continents you can make out in daytime; and many

correspond to cities you've already mapped. The cities

are concentrated near coastlines. They tend to be

sparser in continental interiors. Perhaps the dominant

organisms are desperate for seawater (or maybe

oceangoing ships were once essential for commerce

and emigration).

Some of the lights, though, are not due to cities. In

North Africa, the Middle East, and Siberia, for

example, there are very bright lights in a comparatively

barren landscape due, it turns out, to burnoff in oil and

natural gas wel s. In the Sea of Japan on the day you

first look, there is a strange, triangular-shaped area of

light. In daytime it corresponds to open ocean. This is

no city. What could it be? It is in fact the Japanese

squid fishing fleet, using bril iant il umination to attract

schools of squid up to their deaths. On other days, this

pattern of light wanders al over the Pacific Ocean,

seeking prey. In effect, what you have discovered here

is sushi.

It seems sobering to me that from space you can so

readily detect some of the odds and ends of life on

Earth—the gastrointestinal habits of ruminants,

Japanese cuisine, the means of communicating with

nomadic submarines that carry death for 200 cities—

while so much of our monumental architecture, our

greatest engineering works, our efforts to care for one

another, are almost whol y invisible. It's a kind of

parable.

BY THIS POINT your expedition to the Earth must be

considered highly successful. You've characterized the

environment;

you've

detected

life;

you've

found

manifestations of intel igent beings; you may even have

identified the dominant species, the one transfixed with

geometry and rectilinearity. Surely this planet is worth a

longer and more detailed study. That's why you've now

inserted your spacecraft into orbit around the Earth.

Looking down on the planet, you uncover new puzzles. Al

over the Earth, smokestacks are pouring carbon dioxide

and toxic chemicals into the air. So are the dominant

beings who run on the roadways. But carbon dioxide is a

greenhouse gas. As you watch, the amount of it in the

atmosphere increases steadily, year after year. The same

is true of methane and other greenhouse gases. If this

keeps up, the temperature of the planet is going to

increase. Spectroscopical y, you discover another class of

molecules

being

injected

into

the

air,

the

chlorofluorocarbons. Not only are they greenhouse gases,

but they are also devastatingly effective in destroying the

protective ozone layer.

You look more closely at the center of the South

American continent, which—as you know by now—is a vast

rain forest. Every night you see thousands of fires. In the

daytime, you find the region covered with smoke. Over the

years, al over the planet, you find less and less forest and

more and more scrub desert.

You look down on the large island of Madagascar.

The rivers are colored brown, generating a vast stain

in the surrounding ocean. This is topsoil being washed

out to sea at a rate so high that in another few

decades there wil be none left. The same thing is

happening, you note, at the mouths of rivers al over the

planet.

But no topsoil means no agriculture. In another

century, what wil they eat? What wil they breathe?

How wil they cope with a changing and more

dangerous environment?

From your orbital perspective, you can see that

something has unmistakably gone wrong. The

dominant organisms, whoever they are—who have

gone to so much trouble to rework the surface—are

simultaneously destroying their ozone layer and their

forests, eroding their topsoil, and performing massive,

uncontrol ed experiments on their planet's climate.

Haven't they noticed what's happening? Are they

oblivious to their fate? Are they unable to work

together on behalf of the environment that sustains

them al ?

Perhaps, you think, it's time to reassess the

conjecture that there's intel igent life on Earth.

L O O K I N G F O R L I F E E L S E W H E R E

:

A C A L I B R A T I O N

Spacecraft from the Earth have now flown by dozens of

planets, moons, comets, and asteroids—equipped with

cameras, instruments for measuring heat and radio waves,

spectrometers to determine composition, and a host of

other devices. We have found not a hint of life anywhere

else in the Solar System. But you might be skeptical about

our ability to detect life elsewhere, especial y life different

from the kind we know. Until recently we had never

performed the obvious calibration test: to fly a modern

interplanetary spacecraft by the Earth and see whether we

could detect ourselves. This al changed on December 8,

1990.

Galileo is a NASA spacecraft designed to explore the

giant planet Jupiter, its moons, and its rings. It's named

after the heroic Italian scientist who played so central a role

in toppling the geocentric pretension. It is he who first saw

Jupiter as a world, and who discovered its four big moons.

To get to Jupiter, the spacecraft had to fly close by Venus

(once) and the Earth (twice) and be accelerated by the

gravities of these planets—otherwise there wasn't enough

oomph to get it where it was going. This necessity of

trajectory design permitted us, for the first time, to look

systematical y at the Earth from an alien perspective.

Galileo passed only 960 kilometers (about 600

miles) above the Earth's surface. With some

exceptions—including pictures showing features finer

than 1 kilometer across, and the images of the Earth at

night—much of the spacecraft data described in this

chapter were actual y obtained by Galileo. With

Galileo we were able to deduce an oxygen

atmosphere, water, clouds, oceans, polar ice, life, and

intel igence. The use of instruments and protocols

developed to explore the planets to monitor the

environmental health of our own—something NASA is

now doing in earnest—was described by the astronaut

Sal y Ride as "Mission to Planet Earth."

Other members of the NASA scientific team who

worked with me on Galileo's detection of life on Earth

were Drs. W. Reid Thompson, Cornel University;

Robert Carlson, JPL; Donald Gurnett, University of

Iowa; and Charles Hord, University of Colorado.

Our success in detecting life on Earth with Galileo,

without making any assumptions beforehand about what

kind of life it must be, increases our confidence that when

we fail to find life on other planets, that negative result is

meaningful. Is this judgment anthropocentric, geocentric,

provincial? I don't think so. We're not looking only for our

kind of biology. Any widespread photosynthetic pigment,

any gas grossly out of equilibrium with the rest of the

atmosphere, any rendering of the surface into highly

geometrized patterns, any steady constel ation of lights on

the night hemisphere, any non-astrophysical sources of

radio emission would betoken the presence of life. On

Earth we have found of course only our type, but many other

types would have been detectable elsewhere. We have not

found them. This examination of the third planet strengthens

our tentative conclusion that, of al the worlds in the Solar

System, only ours is graced by life.

We have just begun to search. Maybe life is hiding

on Mars or Jupiter, Europa or Titan. Maybe the Galaxy

is fil ed with worlds as rich in life as ours. Maybe we

are on the verge of making such discoveries. But in

terms of actual knowledge, at this moment the Earth is

unique. No other world is yet known to harbor even a

microbe, much less a technical civilization.

C H A P T

E R 6



THE

TRIUMPH

OF

VOYAGER

They that go down to the sea in

ships, that do business in great waters;

these see the works of the

Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

—

PSALMS,

107

(CA.

150 B.C)

The visions we offer our children shape the future. It

matters what those visions are. Often they become self-

fulfil ing prophecies. Dreams are maps.

I do not think it irresponsible to portray even the direst

futures; if we are to avoid them, we must understand that

they are possible. But where are the alternatives? Where

are the dreams that motivate and inspire? We long for

realistic maps of a world we can be proud to give to our

children. Where are the cartographers of human purpose?

Where are the visions of hopeful futures, of technology as a

tool for human betterment and not a gun on hair trigger

pointed at our heads?

NASA, in its ordinary course of doing business, offers

such a vision. But in the late 1980s and early '90s, many

people saw the U.S. space program as, instead, a

succession of catastrophes—seven brave Americans kil ed

on a mission whose main function was to put up a

communications satel ite that could have been launched at

less cost without risking anybody; a bil ion-dol ar telescope

sent up with a bad case of myopia; a spacecraft to Jupiter

whose main antenna—essential for returning data to Earth

—did not unfurl; a probe lost just as it was about to orbit

Mars. Some people cringe every time NASA describes as

exploration sending a few astronauts 200 miles up in a

smal capsule that endlessly circles the Earth and goes

nowhere. Compared to the bril iant achievements of robotic

missions, it is striking how rarely fundamental scientific

findings emerge from manned missions. Except for

repairing ineptly manufactured or malfunctioning satel ites,

or launching a satel ite that could just as wel have been

sent up in an unmanned booster, the manned program has,

since

the

1970s,

seemed

unable

to

generate

accomplishments commensurate with the cost. Others

looked at NASA as a stalking horse for grandiose

schemes to put weapons into space, despite the fact that

an orbiting weapon is in many circumstances a sitting duck.

And NASA showed many symptoms of an aging,

arteriosclerotic, overcautious, unadventurous bureaucracy.

The trend is perhaps beginning to be reversed.

But these criticisms—many of them surely valid—should

not blind us to NASA triumphs in the same period: the first

exploration of the Uranus and Neptune systems, the in-orbit

repair of the Hubble space telescope, the proof that the

existence of galaxies is compatible with the Big Bang, the

first close-up observations of asteroids, mapping Venus

pole to pole, monitoring ozone depletion, demonstrating the

existence of a black hole with the mass of a bil ion suns at

the center of a nearby galaxy, and a historic commitment to

joint space endeavors by the U.S. and Russia.

There are far-reaching, visionary, and even revolutionary

implications to the space program. Communications

satel ites link up the planet, are central to the global

economy, and, through television, routinely convey the

essential fact that We live in a global community.

Meteorological satel ites predict the weather, save lives in

hurricanes and tornados, and avoid many bil ions of dol ars

in crop losses every year. Military-reconnaissance and

treaty-verification satel ites make nations and the global

civilization more secure; in a world with tens of thousands

of nuclear weapons, they calm the hotheads and paranoids

on al sides; they are essential tools for survival on a

troubled and unpredictable planet.

Earth-observing satel ites, especial y a new generation

soon to be deployed, monitor the health of the global

environment: greenhouse warming, topsoil erosion, ozone

layer depletion, ocean currents, acid rain, the effects of

floods and droughts, and new dangers we haven't yet

discovered. This is straightforward planetary hygiene.

Global positioning systems are now in place so that your

locale is radio-triangulated by several satel ites. Holding a

smal instrument the size of a modern shortwave radio, you

can read out to high precision your latitude and longitude.

No crashed airplane, no ship in fog and shoals, no driver in

an unfamiliar city need ever be lost again.

Astronomical satel ites peering outward from Earth's

orbit observe with unsurpassed clarity—studying questions

ranging from the possible existence of planets around

nearby stars to the origin and fate of the Universe.

Planetary probes from close range explore the gorgeous

array of other worlds in our solar system comparing their

fates with ours.

Al of these activities are forward-looking, hopeful, stirring

and cost-effective. None of them requires "manned"[‡‡]

spaceflight. A key issue facing the future of NASA and

addressed in this book is whether the purported

justifications for human spaceflight are coherent and

sustainable. Is it worth the cost?

But first, let's consider the visions of a hopeful future

vouchsafed by robot spacecraft out among the planets.



VOYAGER 1 AND VOYAGER 2 are the ships that opened the

Solar System for the human species, trailblazing a path for

future generations. Before their launch, in August and

September 1977, we were almost whol y ignorant about

most of the planetary part of the Solar System. In the next

dozen years, they provided our first detailed, close-up

information on many new worlds—some of them previously

known only as fuzzy disks in the eyepieces of ground-

based telescopes, some merely as points of light, and

some whose very existence was unsuspected. They are stil

returning reams of data.

These spacecraft have taught us about the wonders of

other worlds, about the uniqueness and fragility of our own,

about beginnings and ends. They have given us access to

most of the Solar System—both in extent and in mass.

They are the ships that first explored what may be

homelands of our remote descendants.

U.S. launch vehicles are these days too feeble to get

such a spacecraft to Jupiter and beyond in only a few years

by rocket propulsion alone. But if we're clever (and lucky),

there's something else we can do: We can (as Galileo also

did, years later) fly close to one world, and have its gravity

fling us on to the next. A gravity assist, it's cal ed. It costs us

almost nothing but ingenuity. lt's something like grabbing

hold of a post on a moving merry-go-round as it passes—to

speed you up and fling you in some new direction. The

spacecraft's acceleration is compensated for by a

deceleration in the planet's orbital motion around the Sun.

But because the planet is so massive compared to the

spacecraft, it slows down hardly at al . Each Voyager

spacecraft picked up a velocity boost of nearly 40,000

miles per hour from Jupiter's gravity. Jupiter in turn was

slowed down in its motion around the Sun. By how much?

Five bil ion years from now, when our Sun becomes a

swol en red giant, Jupiter wil be one mil imeter short of

where it would have been had Voyager not flown by it in the

late twentieth century.

Voyager 2 took advantage of a rare lining-up of the

planets: A close flyby of Jupiter accelerated it on to Saturn,

Saturn to Uranus, Uranus to Neptune, and Neptune to the

stars. But you can't do this anytime you like: The previous

opportunity for such a game of celestial bil iards presented

itself during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson. We were

then only at the horseback, canoe, and sailing ship stage of

exploration. (Steamboats were the transforming new

technology just around the corner.)

Since adequate funds were unavailable, NASA's Jet

Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) could afford to build

spacecraft that would work reliably only as far as Saturn.

Beyond that, al bets were off. However, because of the

bril iance of the engineering design and the fact that the

JPL engineers who radioed instructions up to the

spacecraft got smarter faster than the spacecraft got stupid

—both spacecraft went on to explore Uranus and Neptune.

These days they are broadcasting back discoveries from

beyond the most distant known planet of the Sun.

We tend to hear much more about the splendors

returned than the ships that brought them, or the

shipwrights. It has al, ways been that way. Even those

history books enamored of the voyages of Christopher

Columbus do not tel us much about the builders of the

Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria, or about the principle

of the caravel. These spacecraft, their designers, builders,

navigators, and control ers are examples of what science

and engineering, set free for wel -defined peaceful

purposes, can accomplish. Those scientists and engineers

should be role models for an America seeking excel ence

and international competitiveness. They should be on our

stamps.

At each of the four giant planets—Jupiter, Saturn,

Uranus, and Neptune—one or both spacecraft studied the

planet itself, its rings, and its moons. At Jupiter, in 1979,

they braved a dose of trapped charged particles a

thousand times more intense than what it takes to kil a

human; enveloped in al that radiation, they discovered the

rings of the largest planet, the first active volcanos outside

Earth, and a possible underground ocean on an airless

world—among a host of surprising discoveries. At Saturn,

in 1980 and 1981, they survived a blizzard of ice and found

not a few new rings, but thousands. They examined frozen

moons mysteriously melted in the comparatively recent

past, and a large world with a putative ocean of liquid

hydrocarbons surmounted by clouds of organic matter.

On January 25, 1986, Voyager 2 entered the Uranus

system and reported a procession of wonders. The

encounter lasted only a few hours, but the data faithful y

relayed back to Earth have revolutionized our knowledge of

the aquamarine planet, its 15 moons. its pitch-black rings,

and its belt of trapped high-energy charged particles. On

August 25, 1989, Voyager 2 swept through the Neptune

system and observed, dimly il uminated by the distant Sun,

kaleidoscopic cloud patterns and a bizarre moon on which

plumes of fine organic particles were being blown about by

the astonishingly thin air. And in 1992, having flown beyond

the outermost known planet, both Voyagers picked up

radio emission thought to emanate from the stil remote

heliopause—the place where the wind from the Sun gives

way to the wind from the stars.

Because we're stuck on Earth, we're forced to peer at

distant worlds through an ocean of distorting air. Much of

the ultraviolet, infrared, and radio waves they emit do not

penetrate our atmosphere. It's easy to see why our

spacecraft have revolutionized the study of the Solar

System: We ascend to stark clarity in the vacuum of space,

and there approach our objectives, flying past them, as did

Voyager, or orbiting them, or landing on their surfaces.

These spacecraft have returned four tril ion bits of

information to Earth, the equivalent of about 100,000

encyclopedia volumes. I described the Voyagers 1 and 2

encounters with the Jupiter system in Cosmos. In the

fol owing pages, I'l say something about the Saturn,

Uranus, and Neptune encounters.

JUST BEFORE VOYAGER 2 was to encounter the Uranus system,

the mission design had specified a final maneuver, a brief

firing of the on-board propulsion system to position the

spacecraft correctly so it could thread its way on a preset

path among the hurtling moons. But the course correction

proved unnecessary. The spacecraft was already within

200 kilometers of its designed trajectory-after a journey

along an arcing path 5 bil ion kilometers long. This is

roughly the equivalent of throwing a pin through the eye of a

needle 50 kilometers away, or firing your rifle in

Washington and hitting the bul 's-eye in Dal as.

Mother lodes of planetary treasure were radioed back to

Earth. But Earth is so far away that by the time the signal

frog Neptune was gathered in by radio telescopes on our

planet, the received power was only 10-16 watts (fifteen

zeros between the decimal point and the one). This weak

signal bears the same pro, portion to the power emitted by

an ordinary reading lamp as the diameter of an atom bears

to the distance from the Earth to the Moon. It's like hearing

an amoeba's footstep.

The mission was conceived during the late 1960s. It was

first funded in 1972. But it was not approved in its final form

(including the encounters with Uranus and Neptune) until

after the ships had completed their reconnaissance of

Jupiter. The two spacecraft were lifted off the Earth by a

no nr e us a b l e Titan/Centaur

booster

configuration.

Weighing about a ton, a Voyager would fil a smal house.

Each draws about 400 watts of power—considerably less

than an average American home—from a generator that

converts radioactive plutonium into electricity. (If it had to

rely on solar energy, the available power would diminish

quickly as the ship ventured farther and farther from the Sun

Were it not for nuclear power, Voyager would have returned

no data at al from the outer Solar System, except perhaps

a little from Jupiter.)

The flow of electricity through the innards of the

spacecraft would generate enough magnetism to

overwhelm the sensitive instrument that measures

interplanetary magnetic fields. So the magnetometer is

placed at the end of along boom, far from the offending

electrical currents. With other projections, it gives Voyager

alter a slightly porcupine appearance. Cameras, infrared

and ultraviolet spectrometers, and an instrument cal ed a

photopolarimeter are on a scan platform that swivels on

command so these device can be aimed at a target world.

The spacecraft must know where Earth is if the antenna is

to be pointed properly and the data rereceived back home.

It also needs to know where the Sun is and at least one

bright star, so it can orient itself in three dimensions and

point properly toward any passing world. If you can't point

the cameras, it does no good to be able to return pictures

over bil ions of miles.

Each spacecraft cost about as much as a single modern

strategic bomber. But unlike bombers, Voyager cannot,

once launched, be returned to the hangar for repairs. The

ship's computers and electronics are therefore designed

redundantly. Much key machinery, including the essential

radio receiver, had at least one backup—waiting to be

cal ed upon should the hour of need ever arrive. When

either Voyager finds itself in trouble, the computers use

branched contingency tree logic to work out the appropriate

course of action. If that doesn't work, the ship radios home

for help.

As the spacecraft journeys increasingly far from Earth,

the roundtrip radio travel time also increases, approaching

eleven hours by the time Voyager is at the distance of

Neptune. Thus, in case of emergency, the spacecraft needs

to know how to put itself into a safe standby mode while

awaiting instructions from Earth. As it ages, more and more

failures are expected, both in its mechanical parts and in its

computer system, although there is no sign, even now, of a

serious memory deterioration, some robotic Alzheimer's

disease.

This is not to say that Voyager is perfect. Serious

mission-threatening, white-knuckle mishaps did occur.

Each time, special teams of engineers—some of whom

had been with the Voyager program since its inception—

were assigned to "work" the problem. They would study the

underlying science and draw upon their previous

experience with the failed subsystems. They would

experiment with identical Voyager spacecraft equipment

that had never been launched, or even manufacture a large

number of components of the sort that failed in order to

gain some statistical understanding of the failure mode.

In April 1978, almost eight months after launch, and while

the ship was approaching the asteroid belt, an omitted

ground command—a human error—caused Voyager 2' s

on-board computer to switch from the prime radio receiver

to its backup, During the next ground transmission to the

spacecraft, the backup receiver refused to lock onto the

signal from Earth. A component cal ed a tracking loop

capacitor had failed. After seven days in which Voyager 2

was entirely out of contact, its fault protection software

suddenly commanded the backup receiver to be switched

off and the prime receiver to be switched back on.

Mysteriously—to this day, no one knows why—the prime

receiver failed moments later. It was never heard from

again. To top it off, the on-board computer now foolishly

insisted on using the failed primary receiver. Through an

unlucky concatenation of human and robotic error, the

spacecraft was now in real jeopardy. No one could think of

a way to get Voyager 2 to revert to the backup receiver.

Even if it did, the backup receiver couldn't receive the

commands from Earth, because of that failed capacitor.

There were many project personnel who feared that al was

lost.

But after a week of obdurate unresponsiveness to al

commands, instructions to switch automatical y between

receivers were accepted and programmed into the skittish

onboard computer. During that same week the JPL

engineers designed an innovative command frequency

control procedure to make sure that essential orders would

be understood by the damaged backup receiver.

The engineers were now able to recommunicate, at least

in a rudimentary way, with the spacecraft. Unfortunately the

backup receiver now turned giddy, becoming extremely

sensitive to stray heat dumped when various components

of the spacecraft powered up or down. In the fol owing

months the JPL engineers devised and conducted tests

that let them thoroughly understand the thermal implications

of most spacecraft operational modes: What would prevent

and what would permit receipt of commands from Earth?

With this information, the backup receiver problem was

entirely circumvented. It subsequently acquired al the

commands sent from Earth on how to gather data in the

Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune systems. The

engineers had saved the mission. (To be on the safe side,

during most of Voyager 2's subsequent flight a nominal

data-taking sequence for the next planet to be encountered

was always sitting in the on-board computers—should the

spacecraft again become deaf to entreaties from home.)

Another heart-wrenching failure occurred just after

Voyager 2 emerged from behind Saturn (as seen from the

Earth) in August 1981. The scan platform had been moving

feverishly—pointing here and there among the rings,

moons, and the planet itself during the al -too-brief

moments of close approach. Suddenly, the platform

jammed. A stuck scan platform is a maddening

predicament: knowing that the spacecraft is flying past

wonders that have never been witnessed, that we wil not

see again for years or decades, and the incurious

spacecraft staring fixedly off into space, ignoring

everything.

The scan platform is driven by actuators containing gear

trains. So first the JCL engineers ran an identical copy of a

flight actuator in a simulated mission. This actuator failed

after 348 turns; the actuator on the spacecraft had failed

after 352 turns. The problem turned out to be a lubrication

failure. Good to know, but what to do about it? Plainly, it

would be impossible to overtake Voyager with ail oilcan.

The engineers wondered whether they could restart the

tailed actuator by alternate heating and cooling; maybe the

resulting thermal stresses would induce the components of

the actuator to expand and contract at different rates and

unjam the system. They tested this notion with special y



manufactured actuators in the laboratory, and then jubilantly

found that in this way they could start the scan platform up

again in space. Project personnel also devised ways to

diagnose any additional trend toward actuator failure early

enough to work around the problem. Thereafter, Voyager

2's scan platform worked perfectly. Al the pictures taken in

the Uranus and Neptune systems owe their existence to

this work. The engineers had saved the day again.

Voyagers 1 and 2 were designed to explore the Jupiter

and Saturn systems only. It is true that their trajectories

would carry them on past Uranus and Neptune, but official y

these planets were never contemplated as targets for

Voyager exploration: The spacecraft were not supposed to

last that long. Because of our wish to fly close to the

mystery world Titan, Voyager 9 was flung by Saturn on a

path that could never encounter any other known world; it is

Voyager 2 that flew on to Uranus and Neptune with bril iant

success. At these immense distances, sunlight is getting

progressively dimmer, and the radio signals transmitted to

Earth are getting progressively fainter. These were

predictable but stil very serious problems that the JPL

engineers and scientists also had to solve.

Because of the low light levels at Uranus and Neptune,

the Voyager television cameras were obliged to take long

time exposures. But the spacecraft was hurtling so fast

through, say, the Uranus system (at about 35,000 miles per

hour) that the image would have been smeared or blurred.

To compensate, the entire spacecraft had to be moved

during the time exposures to cancel out the motion, like

panning in the direction opposite yours while taking a

photograph of a street scene from a moving car. This may

sound easy, but it's not: You have to neutralize the most

innocent of motions. At zero gravity, the mere start and stop

of the on-board tape recorder can jiggle the spacecraft

enough to smear the picture.

This problem was solved by sending up commands to

the spacecraft's little rocket engines (cal ed thrusters),

machines of exquisite sensitivity. With a little puff of gas at

the start and stop of each data-taking sequence, the

thrusters compensated for the tape-recorder jiggle by

turning the entire spacecraft just a little. To deal with the low

radio power received at Earth, the engineers devised a

new and more efficient way to record and transmit the data,

and the radio telescopes on Earth were electronical y

linked together with others to increase their sensitivity.

Overal , the imaging system worked, by many criteria,

better at Uranus and Neptune than it did at Saturn or even

at Jupiter.

Voyager may not yet be done exploring. There is, of

course, a chance that some vital subsystem wil fail

tomorrow, but as far as the radioactive decay of the

plutonium power source is concerned, the two Voyager

spacecraft should be able to return data to Earth roughly

through the year 2015.

Voyager is an intel igent being—part robot, part human. It

extends the human senses to far-off worlds. For simple

tasks and short-term problems, it relies on its own

intel igence; but for more complex tasks and longer-term

problems, it turns to the col ective intel igence and

experience of the JPL engineers. This trend is sure to

grow. The Voyagers embody the technology of the early

1970s; if spacecraft were designed for such a mission

today, they would incorporate stunning advances in artificial

intel igence, in miniaturization, in data-processing speed, in

the ability to self-diagnose and repair, and in the propensity

to learn from experience They would also be much

cheaper.

In the many environments too dangerous for people, on

Earth as wel as in space, the future belongs to robot-

human partnerships that wil recognize the two Voyagers as

antecedents and pioneers. For nuclear accidents, mine

disasters,

undersea

exploration

and

archaeology,

manufacturing, prowling the interiors of volcanos, and

household help, to name only a few potential applications, it

could make an enormous difference to have a ready corps

of smart, mobile, compact, commandable robots that can

diagnose and repair their own malfunctions. There are

likely to be many more of this tribe in the near future.

It is conventional wisdom now that anything built by the

government wil be a disaster. But the two Voyager

spacecraft were built by the government (in partnership with

that other bugaboo, academia). They came in at cost, on

time, and vastly exceeded their design specifications—as

wel as the fondest dreams of their makers. Seeking not to

control, threaten, wound, or destroy, these elegant

machines represent the exploratory part of our nature set

free to roam the Solar System and beyond. This kind of

technology, the treasures it uncovers freely available to al

humans everywhere, has been, over the last few decades,

one of the few activities of the United States admired as

much by those who abhor many of its policies as by those

who agree with it on every issue. Voyager cost each

American less than a penny a year from launch to Neptune

encounter. Missions to the planets are one of those things

—and I mean this not just for the United States, but for the

human species—that we do best.

C H A P

T E R 7

AMONG

THE

MOONS

OF

SATURN

Seat thyself

sultanically among the moons of

Saturn.

—HERMAN

MELVILLE, MOBY DICK, CHAPTER

107 (1851)

There is a world, midway in size between the Moon and

Mars, where the upper air is rippling with electricity—

streaming in from the archetypical ringed planet next door,

where the perpetual brown overcast is tinged with an odd

burnt orange, and where the very stuff of life fal s out of the

skies onto the unknown surface below. It is so far away that

light takes more than an hour to get there from the Sun.

Spacecraft take years. Much about it is stil a mystery—

including whether it holds great oceans. We know just

enough, though, to recognize that within reach may be a

place where certain processes ate today working

themselves out that aeons ago on Earth led to the origin of

life.

On our own world a long-standing—and in some

respects quite promising—experiment has been under way

on the evolution of matter. The oldest known fossils are

about 3.6 bil ion years old. Of course, the origin of life had

to have happened wel before that. But 4.2 or 4.3 bil ion

years ago the Earth was being so ravaged by the final

stages of its formation that life could not yet have come into

being: Massive col isions were melting the surface, turning

the oceans into steam and driving any atmosphere that had

accumulated since the last impact off into space. So

around 4 bil ion years ago, there was a fairly narrow

window—perhaps only a hundred mil ion years wide in

which our most distant ancestors came to be. Once

conditions permitted, life arose fast. Somehow. The first

living things very likely were inept, far less capable than the

most humble microbe alive today—perhaps just barely able

to make crude copies of themselves. But natural selection,

the key process first coherently described by Charles

Darwin, is an instrument of such enormous power that from

the most modest beginnings there can emerge al the

richness and beauty of the biological world.

Those first living things were made of pieces, parts,

building blocks which had to come into being on their own

—that is, driven by the laws of physics and chemistry on a

lifeless Earth. The building blocks of al terrestrial life are

cal ed organic molecules, molecules based on carbon. Of

the stupendous ]lumber of possible organic molecules, very

few are used at the heart of life. The two most important

classes are the amino acids, the building blocks of

proteins, and the nucleotide bases, the building blocks of

the nucleic acids. Mist before the origin of life, where did

these molecules come from? There are only two

possibilities: from the outside or from the inside. We know

that vastly more comets and asteroids were hitting the

Earth than do so today, that these smal worlds are rich

storehouses of complex organic molecules, and that some

of these molecules escaped being fried on impact. Here

I'm describing homemade, not imported, goods: the

organic molecules generated in the air and waters of the

primitive Earth.

Unfortunately, we don't know very much about the

composition of the early air, and organic molecules

are far easier to make in some atmospheres than in

others. There couldn't have been much oxygen,

because oxygen is generated by green plants and

there weren't any green plants yet. There was probably

more hydrogen, because hydrogen is very abundant in

the Universe and escapes from the upper atmosphere

of the Earth into space better than any other atom

(because it's so light). If we can imagine various

possible early atmospheres, we can duplicate them in

the laboratory, supply some energy, and see which

organic molecules are made and in what amounts.

Such experiments have over the years proved

provocative and promising. But our ignorance of initial

conditions limits their relevance.

What we need is a real world whose atmosphere stil

retains some of those hydrogen-rich gases, a world in other

respects something like the Earth, a world in which the

organic building blocks of life are being massively

generated in our own time, a world we can go to to seek

our own beginnings. There is only one such world in the

Solar System.[§§] That world is Titan, the big moon of

Saturn. It's about 5,150 kilometers (3,200 miles) in

diameter, a little less than half the size of the Earth. It takes

16 of our days to complete one orbit of Saturn.

No world is a perfect replica of any other, and in at least

one important respect Titan is very different from the

primitive Earth: Being so far from the Sun, its surface is

extremely cold, far below the freezing point of water, around

180° below zero Celsius. So while the Earth at the time of

the origin of life was, as now, mainly ocean-covered, plainly

there can be no oceans of liquid water on Titan. (Oceans

made of other stuff are a different story, as we shal see.)

The low temperatures provide an advantage, though,

because once molecules are synthesized on Titan, they

tend to stick around: The higher the temperature, the faster

molecules fal to pieces. On Titan the molecules that have

been raining down like manna from heaven for the last 4

bil ion years might stil be there, largely unaltered, deep-

frozen, awaiting the chemists from Earth.

THE INVENTION OF THE TELESCOPE In the seventeenth century led to

the discovery of many new worlds. In 1610 Galileo first

spied the four large satel ites of Jupiter. It looked like a

miniature solar system, the little moons racing around

Jupiter as the planets were thought by Copernicus to orbit

the Sun. It was another blow to the geocentrists. Forty-five

years later, the celebrated Dutch physicist Christianus

Huygens discovered a moon moving about the planet

Saturn and named it Titan.[***] It was a dot of light a bil ion

miles away, gleaming in reflected sunlight. From the time of

its discovery, when European men wore long curly wigs, to

world War I , when American men cut their hair down to

stubble, almost nothing more was discovered about Titan

except the fact it had a curious, tawny color. Ground-based

telescopes could, even in principle, barely make out some

enigmatic detail. The Spanish astronomer J. Comas Sola

reported at the turn of the twentieth century some faint and

indirect evidence of an atmosphere.

In a way, I grew up with Titan. I did my doctoral

dissertation at the University of Chicago under the

guidance of Gerard P. Kuiper, the astronomer who made

the definitive discovery that Titan has an atmosphere.

Kuiper was Dutch and in a direct line of intel ectual descent

from Christianus Huygens. In 1914, while making a

spectroscopic examination of Titan, Kuiper was astonished

to find the characteristic spectral features of the gas

methane. When he pointed the telescope at Titan, there

was the signature of methane.[†††] When he pointed it

away, not a hint of methane. But moons were not supposed

to hold onto sizable atmospheres, and the Earth's Moon

certainly doesn't. Titan could retain an atmosphere, Kuiper

realized, even though its gravity was less than Earth's,

because its upper atmosphere is very cold. The molecules

simply aren't moving fast enough for significant numbers to

achieve escape velocity and trickle away to space.

Daniel Harris, a student of Kuiper's, showed definitively

that Titan is red. Maybe we were looking at a rusty surface,

like that of Mars. If you wanted to learn more about Titan,

you could also measure the polarization of sunlight

reflected off it. Ordinary sunlight is unpolarized. Joseph

Veverka, now a fel ow faculty member at Cornel University,

was my graduate student at Harvard University, and

therefore, so to speak, a grandstudent of Kuiper's. In his

doctoral work, around 1970, he measured the polarization

of Titan and found that it changed as the relative positions

of Titan, the Sun, and the Earth changed. But the change

was very different from that exhibited by, say, the Moon.

Veverka concluded that the character of this variation was

consistent with extensive clouds or haze on Titan. When we

looked at it through the telescope, we weren't seeing its

surface. We knew nothing about what the surface was like.

We had no idea how fat below the clouds the surface was.

So, by the early 1970s, as a kind of legacy from Huygens

and his line of intel ectual descent, we knew at least that

Titan has a dense methane-rich atmosphere, and that it's

probable enveloped by a reddish cloud veil or aerosol

haze. But what kind of cloud is red? By the early 1970s my

col eague Bishun Khare and I had been doing experiments

at Cornel in which we irradiated various methane-rich

atmospheres with Ultraviolet light or electrons and were

generating reddish or brownish solids; the stuff would coat

the interiors of our reaction vessels. It seemed to me that, if

methane-rich Titan had red-brown clouds, those clouds

might very wel be similar to what we were making in the

laboratory. We cal ed this material tholin, after a Greek

word for "muddy." At the beginning we had yen little idea

what it was made of. It was some organic stew made by

breaking apart our starting molecules, and al owing the

atoms—carbon,

hydrogen,

nitrogen—and

molecular

fragments to recombine.

The word "organic" carries no imputation of biological

origin; fol owing long-standing chemical usage dating back

mots than a century, it merely describes molecules built out

of car bon atoms (excluding a few very simple ones such as

carbon monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide, CO2). Since

life on Earth is based oil organic molecules, and since

there was a time before there was life on Earth, some

process must have made organic molecules on our planet

before the time of the first organism. Something sitar, I

proposed, might be happening on Titan today.

The epochal event in our understanding of Titan was the

arrival in 1980 and 1981 of the Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft

in the Saturn system. The ultraviolet, infrared, and radio

instruments revealed the pressure and temperature through

the atmosphere—from the hidden surface to the edge of

space. We learned how high the cloud tops are. We found

that the air on Titan is composed mainly of nitrogen, N2, as

on the Earth today. The other principal constituent is, as

Kuiper found, methane. CH4 the starting material from

which carbon-based organic molecules are generated

there.

A variety of simple organic molecules was found, present

as gases, mainly hydrocarbons and nitriles. The most

complex of them have four "heavy" (carbon and/or nitrogen)

atoms. Hydrocarbons are molecules composed of carbon

and hydrogen atoms only, and are familiar to us as natural

gas, petroleum, and waxes. (They're quite different from

carbohydrates, such as sugars and starch, which also have

oxygen atoms.) Nitriles are molecules with a carbon and

nitrogen atom attached in a particular way. The best known

nitrile is HCN, hydrogen cyanide, a deadly gas for humans.

But hydrogen cyanide is implicated in the steps that on

Earth led to the origin of life.

Finding these simple organic molecules in Titan's upper

atmosphere—even if present only in a part per mil ion or a

part per bil ion—is tantalizing. Could the atmosphere of the

primeval Earth have been similar? There's about ten times

more air oil Titan than there is on Earth today, but the early

Earth may wel have had a denser atmosphere.

Moreover, Voyager discovered an extensive region of

energetic electrons and protons surrounding Saturn,

trapped by the planet's magnetic field. During the course of

its orbital motion around Saturn, Titan bobs in and out of

this magnetosphere. Beams of electrons (plus solar

ultraviolet light) fal on the upper air of Titan, just as charged

particles (plus solar ultraviolet light) were intercepted by the

atmosphere of the primitive Earth.

So it's a natural thought to irradiate the appropriate

mixture of nitrogen and methane with ultraviolet light or

electrons at very low pressures, and find out what more

complex molecules can be made. Can we simulate what's

going on in Titan's high atmosphere? In our laboratory at

Cornel —with my col eague W. Reid Thompson playing a

key role—we've replicated some of Titan's manufacture of

organic gases. The simplest hydrocarbons on Titan are

manufactured by ultraviolet light from the Sun. But for al the

other gas products, those made most readily by electrons

in the laboratory correspond to those discovered by

Voyager on Titan, and in the same proportions. The

correspondence is one to one. The next most abundant

gases that we've found in the laboratory wil be looked for in

future studies of Titan. The most complex organic gases we

make have six or seven carbon and/or nitrogen atoms.

These product molecules are on their way to forming

tholins.

WE HAD HOPED FOR A BREAK In the weather as Voyager 1

approached Titan. A long distance away, it appeared as a

tiny disk; at closest approach, our camera's field of view

was fil ed by a smal province of Titan. If there had been a

break in the haze and clouds, even only a few miles across,

as we scanned the disk we would have seen something of

its hidden surface. But there was no hint of a break. This

world is socked in. No one on Earth knows what's on

Titan's surface. And an observer there, looking up il

ordinary visible light, would have no idea of the glories that

await upon ascending through the haze and beholding

Saturn and its magnificent rings.

From measurements by Voyager, by the International

Ultraviolet Explorer observatory in Earth orbit, and by

ground-based telescopes, we know a fair amount about the

orange-brown haze particles that obscure the surface:

which colors of light they like to absorb, which colors they

pretty much let pass through them, how much they bend, the

light that does pass through them, and how big they are.

(They're mostly the size of the particles in cigarette smoke.)

The "optical properties" wil depend, of course, on the

composition of the haze particles.

In col aboration with Edward Arakawa of Oak Ridge

National Laboratory in Tennessee, Khare and I have

measured the optical properties of Titan tholin. It turns out

to be a dead ringer for the real Titan haze. No other

candidate material, mineral or organic, matches the optical

constants of Titan. So we can fairly claim to have bottled

the haze of Titan—formed high in its atmosphere, slowly

fal ing out, and accumulating in copious amounts on its

surface. What is this stuff made of?

It's very hard to know the exact composition of a complex

organic solid. For example, the chemistry of coal is stil not

ful y understood, despite a long-standing economic

incentive. But we've found out some things about Titan

tholin. It contains many of the essential building blocks of

life on Earth. Indeed, if you drop Titan tholin into water you

make a large number of amino acids, the fundamental

constituents of proteins, and nucleotide bases also, the

building blocks of DNA and RNA. Some of the amino acids

so formed are widespread in living things on Earth. Others

are of a completely different sort. A rich array of other

organic molecules is present also, some relevant to life,

some not. During the past four bil ion years, immense

quantities of organic molecules sedimented out of the

atmosphere onto the surface of Titan. If it's al deep-frozen

and unchanged in the intervening aeons, the amount

accumulated should be at least tens of meters (a hundred

feet) thick; outside estimates put it at a kilometer deep.

But at 180°C below the freezing point of water, you might

very wel think that amino acids wil never be made.

Dropping tholins into water may be relevant to the early

Earth, but not, it would seem, to Titan. However, comets

and asteroids must on occasion come crashing into the

surface of Titan. (The other nearby moons of Saturn show

abundant impact craters, and the atmosphere of Titan isn't

thick enough to prevent large, high-speed objects from

reaching the surface.) Although we've never seen the

surface of Titan, planetary scientists nevertheless know

something about its composition. The average density of

Titan lies between the density of ice and the density of rock.

Plausibly it contains both. Ice and rock are abundant on

nearby worlds, some of which are made of nearly pure rice.

If the surface of Titan is icy, a high-speed cometary impact

wil temporarily melt the ice. Thompson and I estimate that

any given spot on Titan's surface has a better than 50-50

chance of having once been melted, with an average

lifetime of the impact melt and slurry of almost a thousand

years.

This makes for a very different story. The origin of life on

Earth seems to have occurred in oceans and shal ow

tidepools. Life on Earth is made mainly of water, which

plays an essential physical and chemical role. Indeed, it's

hard, for us water-besotted creatures to imagine life without

water. If on our planet the origin of life took less than a

hundred mil ion years, is there any chance that on Titan it

took a thousand? With tholins mixed into liquid water-even

for only a thousand years the surface of Titan may be much

further along toward the origin of life than we thought.



DESPITE ALL THIS we understand pitiful y little about Titan. This

was brought home forceful y to me at a scientific

symposium on Titan held in Toulouse, France, and

sponsored by the European Space Agency (ESA).

While oceans of liquid water are impossible on Titan,

oceans of liquid hydrocarbons are not. Clouds of

methane (CH4), the most abundant hydrocarbon, are

expected not far above the surface. Ethane (C2H6), the

next most abundant hydrocarbon, must condense out at

the surface in the same way that water vapor becomes a

liquid near the surface of the Earth, where the

temperature is general y between the freezing and

melting points. Vast oceans of liquid hydrocarbons

should have accumulated over the lifetime of Titan. They

would lie far beneath the haze and clouds. But that

doesn't mean they would be whol y inaccessible to us—

because radio waves readily penetrate the atmosphere

of Titan and its suspended, slowly fal ing fine particles.

In Toulouse, Duane O. Muhleman of the California

Institute of Technology described to us the very difficult

technical feat of transmitting a set of radio pulses from a

radio telescope in California's Mojave Desert, so they

reach Titan, penetrate through the haze and clouds to its

surface, are reflected back into space, and then

returned to Earth. Here, the greatly enfeebled signal is

picked up by an array of radio telescopes near Socorro,

New Mexico. Great. If Titan has a rocky or icy surface, a

radar pulse reflected off its surface should be detectable

on Earth. But if Titan were covered with hydrocarbon

oceans, Muhleman shouldn't see a thing: Liquid

hydrocarbons are black to these radio waves, and no

echo would have been returned to Earth. In fact,

Muhleman's giant radar system sees a reflection when

some longitudes of Titan are turned toward Earth, and

not at other longitudes. Al right, you might say, so Titan

has oceans and continents, and it was a continent that

reflected the signals back to Earth. But if Titanic in this

respect like the Earth—for some meridians (through

Europe and Africa, say) mainly continent, and for others

(through the central Pacific, say) mainly ocean—then we

must confront another problem:

The orbit of Titan around Saturn is not a perfect circle. it's

noticeably squashed out, or el iptical. If Titan has extensive

oceans, though, the giant planet Saturn around which it

orbits wil raise substantial tides on Titan, and the resulting

tidal friction wil circularize Titan's orbit in much less than

the age of the Solar System. In a 1982 scientific paper

cal ed "The Tide in the Seas of Titan," Stanley Dermott,

now at the University of Florida, and I argued that for this

reason Titan must be either an al -ocean or an al -land

world. Otherwise the tidal friction in places where the ocean

is shal ow would have taken its tol . Lakes and islands

might be permitted, but anything more and Titan would

have a very different orbit than the one we see.

We have, then, three scientific arguments—one

concluding that this world is almost entirely covered with

hydrocarbon oceans, another that it's a mix of continents

and oceans, and a third requiring us to choose, counseling

that Titan can't have extensive oceans and extensive

continents at the same time. It wil be interesting to see

what the answer turns out to be.

What I've just told you is a kind of scientific progress

report. Tomorrow there might be a new finding that clears

up these mysteries and contradictions. Maybe there's

something wrong with Muhleman's radar results, although

it's hard to see what it might be: His system tel s him he's

seeing Titan when it's nearest, when he ought to be seeing

Titan. Maybe there's something wrong with Dermott's and

my calculation about the tidal evolution of the orbit of Titan,

but no one has been able to find any errors so far. And it's

Bard to see how ethane can avoid condensing out at the

surface of Titan. Maybe, despite the low temperatures, over

bil ions of years there's been a change in the chemistry;

maybe some combination of comets impacting from the

sky and volcanoes and other tectonic events, helped along

by cosmic rays, can congeal liquid hydrocarbons, turning

them into some complex organic solid that reflects radio

waves back to space. Or maybe something reflective to

radio waves is floating on the ocean surface. But liquid

hydrocarbons are very underdense: Every known organic

solid, unless extremely frothy, would sink like a stone in the

seas of Titan.

Dermott and I now wonder whether, when we imagined

continents and oceans on Titan, we were too transfixed by

our experience on our own world, too Earth-chauvinist in

our thinking. Battered, cratered terrain and abundant

impact basins cover other moons in the Saturn system. If

we pictured liquid hydrocarbons slowly accumulating on

one of those worlds, we would wind up not with global

oceans, but with isolated large craters fil ed, although not to

the brim, with liquid hydrocarbons. Many circular seas of

petroleum, some over a hundred miles across, would be

splattered across the surface—but no perceptible waves

would be stimulated by distant Saturn and, it is conventional

to think, no ships, no swimmers, no surfers, and no fishing.

Tidal friction should, we calculate, be negligible in such a

case, and Titan's stretched-out, el iptical orbit would not

have become so circular. We can't know for sure until we

start getting radar or near-infrared images of the surface.

But perhaps this is the resolution of our dilemma: Titan as a

world of large circular hydrocarbon lakes, more of them in

some longitudes than in others.

Should we expect an icy surface covered with deep tholin

sediments, a hydrocarbon ocean with at most a few

organic encrusted islands poking up here and there, a

world of crater lakes, or something more subtle that we

haven't yet figured out? This isn't just an academic

question, because there's a real spacecraft being

designed to go to Titan. In a joint NASA/ESA program, a

spacecraft cal ed Cassini wil be launched in October 1997

—if al goes wel . With two flybys of Venus, one of Earth,

and one of Jupiter for gravitational assists, the ship wil ,

after a seven-year voyage, be injected into orbit around

Saturn. Each time the spacecraft comes close to Titan, the

moon wil be examined by an array of instruments, including

radar. Because Cassini wil be so much closer to Titan, it

wil be able to resolve many details on Titan's surface

indetectable to Muhleman's pioneering Earth-based

system. It's also likely that the surface can be viewed in the

near infrared. Maps of the hidden surface of Titan may be

in our hands sometime in the summer of 2004.

Cassini is also carrying an entry probe, fittingly cal ed

Huygens, which wil detach itself from the main spacecraft

and plummet into Titan's atmosphere. A great parachute

wil be deployed. The instrument package wil slowly settle

through the organic haze down into the lower atmosphere,

through the methane clouds. It wil examine organic

chemistry as it descends, and—if it survives the landing—

on the surface of this world as wel .

Nothing is guaranteed. But the mission is technical y

feasible, hardware is being built, an impressive coterie of

specialists, including many young European scientists, are

hard at work on it, and al the nations responsible seem

committed to the project. Perhaps it wil actual y come

about. Perhaps winging across the bil ion miles of

intervening interplanetary space wil be, in the not too

distant future. news about how far along the path to life

Titan has come.

C H A

P T E R 8

THE

FIRST

NEW

PLANET

1 implore you, you do

not hope to be able to give the reasons



for the number of planets, do you?

This worry has

been resolved .

. .



—

JOHANNES

KEPLER,



EPITOME

OF

COPERNICAN

ASTRONOMY,



BOOK 4 / 1621

Before we invented civilization, our ancestors lived mainly

in the open, out under the sky. Before we devised artificial

lights and atmospheric pol ution and modern forms of

nocturnal entertainment, we watched the stars. There were

practical calendrical reasons, of course, but there was

more to it than that. Even today, the most jaded city dwel er

can be unexpectedly moved upon encountering a clear

night sky studded with thousands of twinkling stars. When it

happens to me after al these years, it stil takes my breath

away.

In every culture, the sky and the religious impulse are

intertwined. I lie back in an open field and the sky surround

me. I'm overpowered by its scale. It's so vast and so far

away that my own insignificance becomes palpable. But I

don't feel rejected by the sky. I'm a part of it, tiny, to be sure,

but everything is tiny compared to that overwhelming

immensity, And when I concentrate on the stars, the

planets, and their motions, I have an irresistible sense of

machinery, clockwork, elegant precision working on a scale

that, however lofty our aspirations, dwarfs and humbles us.

Most of the great inventions in human history—from

stone tools and the domestication of fire to written

language—were made by unknown benefactors. Our

institutional memory of long-gone events is feeble. We do

not know the name of that ancestor who first noted that

planets were different from stars. She or he must have lived

tens, perhaps even hundreds of thousands of years ago.

But eventual y people al over the world understood that five,

no more, of the bright points of light that grace the night sky

break lockstep with the others over a period of months,

moving strangely-almost as if they had minds of their own.

Sharing the odd apparent motion of these planets were

the Sun and Moon, making seven wandering bodies in al .

These seven were important to the ancients, and they

named them after gods not any old gods, but the main

gods, the chief gods, the ones who tel other gods (and

mortals) what to do. One of the planets, bright and slow-

moving, was named by the Babylonians after Marduk, by

the Norse after Odin, by the Greeks after Zeus, and by the

Romans after Jupiter, in each case the king of the gods.

The faint, fast-moving one that was never far from the Sun

the Romans named Mercury, after the messenger of the

gods; the most bril iant of them was named Venus, after the

goddess of love and beauty; the blood red one Mars, after

the god of war; and the most sluggish of the bunch Saturn,

after the god of time. These metaphors and al usions were

the best our ancestors could do: They possessed no

scientific instruments beyond the naked eye, they were

confined to the Earth, and they had no idea that it, too, is a

planet.[‡‡‡]

When it got to be time to design the week—a period of

time, unlike the day, month, and year, with no intrinsic

astronomical significance—it was assigned seven days,

each named after one of the seven anomalous lights in the

night sky. We can readily make out the remnants of this

convention. In English, Saturday is Saturn's day. Sunday

and Mo[o]nday are clear enough. Tuesday through Friday

are named after the gods of the Saxon and kindred

Teutonic invaders of Celtic/Roman Britain: Wednesday, for

example, is Odin's (or Wodin's) day, which would be more

apparent if we pronounced it as it's spel ed, "Wedn's Day";

Thursday is Thor's day; Friday is the day of Freya, goddess

of love. The last day of the week stayed Roman, the rest of

it became German.

In al Romance languages, such as French, Spanish, and

Italian, the connection is stil more obvious, because they 4

derive from ancient Latin, in which the days of the week

were named (in order, beginning with Sunday) after the

Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn.

(The Sun's day became the Lord's day.) They could have

named the days in order of the brightness of the

corresponding astronomical bodies—the Sun, the Moon,

Venus, Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Mercury (and thus Sunday,

Monday,

Friday,

Thursday,

Tuesday,

Saturday,

Wednesday)—but they did not. If the days of the week in

Romance languages had been ordered by distance from

the Sun, the sequence would be Sunday, Wednesday,

Friday, Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday. No one

knew the order of the planets, though, back when we were

naming planets, gods, and days of the week. The ordering

of the days of the week seems arbitrary, although perhaps

it does acknowledge the primacy of the Sun.

This col ection of seven gods, seven days, and seven

worlds the Sun, the Moon, and the five wandering planets

entered the perceptions of people everywhere. The number

seven began to acquire supernatural connotations. There

were seven "heavens," the transparent spherical shel s,

centered on the Earth, that were imagined to make these

worlds move. The outermost—the seventh heaven—is

where the "fixed" stars were imagined to reside. There are

Seven Days of Creation (if we include God's day of rest),

seven orifices to the head, seven virtues, seven deadly

sins, seven evil demons in Sumerian myth. seven vowels in

the Greek alphabet (each affiliated with a planetary god),

Seven Governors of Destiny according to the Hermetists,

Seven Great Books of Manichaeism, Seven Sacraments,

Seven Sages of Ancient Greece, and seven alchemical

"bodies" (gold, silver, iron, mercury, lead, tin, and copper—

gold stil associated with the Sun, silver with the Moon, iron

with Mars, etc.). The seventh son of a seventh son is

endowed with supernatural powers. Seven is a "lucky"

number. In the New Testament's Book of Revelations,

seven seals on a scrol are opened, seven trumpets are

sounded, seven bowls are fil ed. St. Augustine obscurely

argued for the mystic importance of seven on the grounds

that three "is the first whole number that is odd" (what about

one?), "four the first that is even" (what about two?), and "of

these . . . seven is composed." And so on. Even in our time

these associations linger.

The existence even of the four satel ites of Jupiter that

Galileo discovered—hardly planets—was disbelieved on

the grounds that it chal enged the precedence of the

number seven. As acceptance of the Copernican system

grew, the Earth was added to the list of planets, and the

Sun and Moon were removed. Thus, there seemed to be

only six planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and

Saturn). So learned academic arguments were invented

showing why there had to be six. For example, six is the

first "perfect" number, equal to the sum of its divisors (1 + 2

+ 3). Q.E.D. And anyway, there were only six days of

creation, not seven. People found ways to accommodate

from seven planets to six.

As those adept at numerological mysticism adjusted to

the Copernican system, this self-indulgent mode of thinking

spil ed over from planets to moons. The Earth had one

moon; Jupiter had the four Galilean moons. That made five.

Clearly one was missing. (Don't forget: Six is the first

perfect number.) When Huygens discovered Titan in 1655,

he and many others convinced themselves that it was the

last: Six planets, six moons, and God's in His Heaven.

The historian of science I. Bernard Cohen of Harvard

University has pointed out that Huygens actual y gave up

searching for other moons because it was apparent, from

such arguments, that no more were to be found. Sixteen

years later, ironical y with Huygens in attendance, G. D.

Cassim[§§§] of the Paris Observatory discovered a

seventh moon—Iapetus, a bizarre world with one

hemisphere black and the other white, in an orbit exterior to

Titan's. Shortly after, Cassim discovered Rhea, the next

Saturnian moon interior to Titan.

Here was another opportunity for numerology, this time

harnessed to the practical task of flattering patrons.

Cassim added up the number of planets (six) and the

number of satel ites (eight) and got fourteen. Now it so

happened that the man who built Cassim's observatory for

him and paid his salary was Louis XIV of France, the Sun

King. The astronomer promptly "presented" these two new

moons to his sovereign and proclaimed that Louis's

"conquests" reached to the ends of the Solar System.

Discreetly, Cassim then backed off from looking for more

moons; Cohen suggests he was afraid one more might

now offend Louis—a monarch not to be trifled with, who

would shortly be throwing his subjects into dungeons for the

crime of being Protestants. Twelve years later, though,

Cassim returned to the search and found—doubtless with a

measure of trepidation—another two moons. (It is probably

a good thing that we have not continued in this vein;

otherwise France would have been burdened by seventy-

some-odd Bourbon kings named Louis.)

WHEN CLAIMS OF NEW WORLDS WERE MADE In the late eighteenth

century, the force of such numerological arguments had

much dissipated. Stil , it was with a real sense of surprise

that people heard in 1781 about a new planet, discovered

through the telescope. New moons were comparatively

unimpressive, especial y after the first six or eight. But that

there were new planets to be found and that humans had

devised the means to do so were both considered

astonishing, and properly so. If there is one previously

unknown planet, there may be many more—in this solar

system and in others. Who can tel what might be found if a

multitude of new worlds are hiding in the dark?

The discovery was made not even by a professional

astronomer but by Wil iam Herschel, a musician whose

relatives had come to Britain with the family of another

anglified German, the reigning monarch and future

oppressor of the American colonists, George I I. It

became Herschel's wish to cal the planet George

("George's Star," actual y), after his patron. but,

providential y, the name didn't stick. (Astronomers

seem to have been very busy buttering up kings.)

Instead, the planet that Herschel found is cal ed Uranus

(an inexhaustible source of hilarity renewed in each

generation of English-speaking nine-year-olds). It is

named after the ancient sky god who, according to

Greek myth, was Saturn's father and thus the

grandfather of the Olympian gods.

We no longer consider the Sun and Moon to be

planets, and ignoring the comparatively insignificant

asteroids and comets, count Uranus as the seventh

planet in order from the Sun (Mercury, Venus, Earth,

Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto). It is the

first planet unknown to the ancients. The four outer,

Jovian, planets turn out to be very different from the

four inner, terrestrial, planets. Pluto is a separate case.

As the years passed and the quality of astronomical

instruments unproved, we began to learn more about

distant Uranus. What reflects the dim sunlight back to us is

no solid surface, but

atmosphere and clouds just as for Titan, Venus, Jupiter

Saturn, and Neptune. The air on Uranus is made of

hydrogen and helium, the two simplest gases. Methane and

other hydrocarbons are also present. Just below the clouds

visible to Earthbound observers is a massive atmosphere

with enormous quantities of ammonia, hydrogen sulfide,

and, especial y, water.

At depth on Jupiter and Saturn, the pressures are so

great that atoms sweat electrons, and the air becomes a

metal. That does not seem to happen on less massive

Uranus, because the pressures at depth are less. Stil

deeper, discovered only by its subtle tugs on Uranus'

moons, whol y inaccessible to view, under the crushing

weight of the overlying atmosphere, is a rocky surface. A

big Earthlike planet is hiding down there, swathed in an

immense blanket of air.

The Earth's surface temperature is due to the sunlight it

intercepts. Turn off the Sun and the planet soon chil s—not

to trifling Antarctic cold, not just so cold that the oceans

freeze, but to a cold so intense that the very air precipitates

out, forming a ten-meter-thick layer of oxygen and nitrogen

snows covering the whole planet. The little bit of energy that

trickles up from the Earth's hot interior would be insufficient

to melt these snows. For Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune it's

different. There's about as much heat pouring out from their

interiors as they acquire from the warmth of the distant Sun.

Turn off the Sun, and they would be only a little affected.

But Uranus is another story. Uranus is an anomaly

among the Jovian planets. Uranus is like the Earth: There's

very little intrinsic heat pouring out. We have no good

understanding of why this should be, why Uranus—which in

many respects is so similar to Neptune—should lack a

potent source of internal heat. For this reason, among

others, we cannot say we understand what is going on in

the deep interiors of these mighty worlds.

Uranus is lying on its side as it goes around the Sun. In

the 1990s. the south pole is heated by the Sun, and it is this

pole that Earthbound observers at the end of the twentieth

century see when they look at Uranus. It takes Uranus 84

Earth years to make one circuit of the Sun. So in the 2030s,

the north pole wil be sunward (and Earthward). In the

2070s the south pole wil be pointing to the Sun once again.

In between, Earthbound astronomers wil be looking mainly

at equatorial latitudes.

Al the other planets spin much more upright in their

orbits. No one is sure of the reason for Uranus' anomalous

spin; the most promising suggestion is that sometime in its

early history, bil ions of years ago, it was struck by a rogue

planet, about the size of the Earth, in a highly eccentric

orbit. Such a col ision, if it ever happened, must have

worked much tumult in the Uranus system; for al we know,

there may be other vestiges of ancient havoc stil left for us

to find. But Uranus' remoteness tends to guard its

mysteries.

In 1977 a team of scientists led by James El iot, then of

Cornel University, accidental y discovered that, like Saturn,

Uranus has rings. The scientists were flying over the Indian

Ocean in a special NASA airplane—the Kuiper Airborne

Observatory—to witness the passage of Uranus in front of

a star. (Such passages, or occultations as they're cal ed,

happen from time to time, precisely because Uranus slowly

moves with respect to the distant stars.) The observers

were surprised to find that the star winked on and off

several times just before it passed behind Uranus and its

atmosphere, then several times more just after it emerged.

Since the patterns of winking on and off were the same

before and after occultation, this finding (and much

subsequent work) has led to the discovery of nine very thin,

very dark circumplanetary rings, giving Uranus the

appearance of a bul 's-eye in the sky.

Surrounding the rings, Earthbound observers understood

were the concentric orbits of the five moons then known:

Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania, and Oberon. They're

named after characters in Shakespeare's A Midsummer

Night's Dream and The Tempest, and in Alexander Pope's

The Rape of the Lock. Two of them were found by Herschel

himself. The innermost of the five, Miranda, was discovered

as recently as 1948, by my teacher G. P. Kuiper. [****] I

remember how great an achievement the discovery of a

new moon of Uranus was considered back then. The near-

infrared light reflected by al five moons subsequently

revealed the spectral signature of ordinary water ice on

their Surfaces. And no wonder—Uranus is so far from the

Sun that it is no brighter there at noontime than it is after

sunset on Earth. The temperatures are frigid. Any water

must be frozen.

A REVOLUTION IN OUR UNDERSTANDING of the Uranus system—

the planet, its rings, and its moons—began on January 24,

1986. On that day, after a journey of 8½ years, the

Voyager 2 spacecraft sailed very near to Miranda, and hit

the bul 's-eye in the sky. Uranus' gravity then flung it on to

Neptune. The spacecraft returned 4,300 close-up pictures

of the Uranus system and a wealth of other data.

Uranus was found to be surrounded by an intense

radiation belt, electrons and protons trapped by the planet's

magnetic field. Voyager flew through this radiation belt,

measuring the magnetic field and the trapped charged

particles as it went. It also detected—in changing timbres,

harmonies, and nuance, but mainly in fortissimo—a

cacophony of radio waves generated by the speeding,

trapped particles. Something similar was discovered on

Jupiter and Saturn and would be later found at Neptune—

but always with a theme and counterpoint characteristic of

each world.

On Earth the magnetic and geographical poles are

quite close together. On Uranus the magnetic axis and

the axis of rotation are tilted away from each other by

some 60 degrees. No one yet understands why: Some

have suggested that we are catching Uranus in a

reversal of its north and south magnetic poles, as

periodical y happens on Earth. Others propose that this

too is the consequence of that mighty, ancient col ision

that knocked the planet over. But we do not know.

that knocked the planet over. But we do not know.

Uranus is emitting much more ultraviolet light than it's

receiving from the Sun, probably generated by charged

particles leaking out of the magnetosphere and striking

its upper atmosphere. From a vantage point in the

Uranus system, the spacecraft examined a bright star

winking on and off as the rings of Uranus passed by.

New faint dust bands were found. From the perspective

of Earth, the spacecraft passed behind Uranus; so the

radio signals it was transmitting back home passed

tangential y through the Uranian atmosphere, probing it

—to below its methane clouds. A vast and deep ocean,

perhaps 8,000 kilometers thick, of super-heated liquid

water floating in the air is inferred by some.

Among the principal glories of the Uranus encounter

were the pictures. With Voyager's two television

cameras, we discovered ten new moons, determined

the length of the day in the clouds of Uranus (about 17

hours), and studied about a dozen rings. The most

spectacular pictures were those returned from the five

larger, previously known moons of Uranus, especial y

the smal est of them, Kuiper's Miranda. Its surface is a

tumult of fault val eys, paral el ridges, sheer cliffs, low

mountains, impact craters, and frozen floods of once-

molten surface material. This turmoiled landscape is

unexpected for a smal , cold, icy world so distant from

the Sun. Perhaps the surface was melted and reworked

in some long-gone epoch when a gravitational

resonance between Uranus, Miranda, and Ariel pumped

energy from the nearby planet into Miranda's interior. Or

perhaps we are seeing the results of the primordial

col ision that is thought to have knocked Uranus over.

Or, just conceivably, maybe Miranda was once utterly

destroyed, dismembered, blasted into smithereens by a

wild careening world, with many col ision fragments stil

left in Miranda's orbit. The shards and remnants, slowly

col iding, gravitational y attracting one another, may have

re-aggregated into just such a jumbled, patchy,

unfinished world as Miranda is today.

For me, there's something eerie about the pictures of

dusky Miranda, because I can remember so wel when it

`vas only a faint point of light almost lost in the glare of

Uranus, discovered through great difficulty by dint of the

astronomer's skil s and patience. In only half a lifetime it has

gone from an undiscovered world to a destination whose

ancient and idiosyncratic secrets have been at least

partial y revealed.

C H A P T

E R 9

AN

AMERICAN

SHIP AT

THE

FRONTIERS OF

THE

SOLAR

SYSTEM

. . . by the

shore

Of

Triton's

Lake . . .

I will clear

my breast

of

secrets.



—EURIPIDES,

ION

(CA.

413 B.C.)

Neptune was the final port of cal in Voyager 2's grand tour

of the Solar System. Usual y, it is thought of as the

penultimate planet, with Pluto the outermost. But because

of Pluto's stretched-out, el iptical orbit, Neptune has lately

been the outermost planet, and wil remain so until 1999.

Typical temperatures in its upper clouds are about -240°C,

because it is so far from the warming rays of the Sun. It

would be colder stil except for the heat wel ing up from its

interior. Neptune glides along the hem of interstel ar night. It

is so far away that, in its sky, the Sun appears as little more

than an extremely bright star.

How far? So far away that it has yet to complete a single

trip around the Sun, a Neptunian year, since its discovery in

1846.[††††] It's so far away that it cannot be seen with

the naked eye. It's so far away that it takes light—faster

than which nothing can go—more than five hours to get

from Neptune to Earth.

When Voyager 2 raced through the Neptune system in

1989, its cameras, spectrometers, particle and field

detectors, and other instruments were feverishly examining

the planet, its moons, and its rings. The planet itself, like its

cousins Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus, is a giant. Every planet

is an Earthlike world at heart—but the four gas giants wear

elaborate, cumbersome disguises. Jupiter and Saturn are

great gas worlds with relatively smal rocky and icy cores.

But Uranus and Neptune are fundamental y rock and ice

worlds swaddled in dense atmospheres that hide them

from view.

Neptune is four times bigger than the Earth. When we

look down on its cool, austere blueness, again we are

seeing only atmosphere and clouds—no solid surface.

Again, the atmosphere is made mainly of hydrogen and

helium, with a little methane and traces of other

hydrocarbons. There may also be some nitrogen. The

bright clouds, which seem to be methane crystals, float

above thick, deeper clouds of unknown composition. From

the motion of the clouds we discovered fierce winds,

approaching the local speed of sound. A Great Dark Spot

was found, curiously at almost the same latitude as the

Great Red Spot on Jupiter. The azure color seems

appropriate for a planet named after the god of the sea.

Surrounding this dimly lit, chil y, stormy, remote world is—

here also—a system of rings, each composed of

innumerable orbiting objects ranging in size from the fine

particles in cigarette smoke to smal trucks. Like the rings

of the other Jovian planets, those of Neptune seem to be

evanescent—it is calculated that gravity and solar radiation

wil disrupt them in much less than the age of the Solar

System. If they are destroyed quickly, we must see them

only because they were made recently. But how can rings

be made?

The biggest moon in the Neptune system is cal ed

Triton.[‡‡‡‡] Nearly six of our days are required for it to

orbit Neptune, which—alone among big moons in the Solar

System—it does in the opposite direction to which its

planet spins (clockwise if we say Neptune rotates

counterclockwise). Triton has a nitrogen-rich atmosphere,

somewhat similar to Titan's; but, because the air and haze

are much thinner, we can see its surface. The landscapes

are varied and splendid. This is a world of ices—nitrogen

ice, methane ice, probably underlain by more familiar water

ice and rock. There are impact basins, which seem to have

been flooded with liquid before refreezing (so there once

were lakes on Triton); impact craters; long crisscrossing

val eys; vast plains covered by freshly fal en nitrogen snow;

puckered terrain that resembles the skin of a cantaloupe;

and more or less paral el, long, dark streaks that seem to

have been blown by the wind and then deposited on the icy

surface despite how sparse Triton's atmosphere is (about

1/10,000 the thickness of the Earth's).

Al the craters on Triton are pristine—as if stamped out

by some vast mil ing device. There are no slumped wal s or

muted relief. Even with the periodic fal ing and evaporation

of snow, it seems that nothing has eroded the surface of

Triton in bil ions of years. So the craters that were gouged

out during the formation of Triton must have al been fil ed in

and covered over by some early global resurfacing event.

Triton orbits Neptune in the opposite direction to Neptune's

rotation—unlike the situation with the Earth and its moon,

and with most of the large moons in the Solar System. If

Triton had formed out of the same spinning disk that made

Neptune, it ought to be going around Neptune in the same

direction that Neptune rotates. So Triton was not made

from the original local nebula around Neptune, but arose

somewhere else—perhaps far beyond Pluto—and was by

chance gravitational y captured when it passed too close to

Neptune. This event should have raised enormous solid-

body tides in Triton, melting the surface and sweeping

away al the past topography.

In some places the surface is as bright and white as

freshly fal en Antarctic snows (and may offer a skiing

experience unrivaled in al the Solar System). Elsewhere

there's a tint, ranging from pink to brown. One possible

explanation: Freshly fal en snows of nitrogen, methane, and

other hydrocarbons are irradiated by solar ultraviolet light

and by electrons trapped in the magnetic field of Neptune,

through which Triton plows. We know that such irradiation

wil convert the snows (like the corresponding gases) to

complex, dark, reddish organic sediments, ice tholins—

nothing alive, but here too composed of some of the

molecules implicated in the origin of life on Earth four bil ion

years ago.

In local winter, layers of ice and snow build up on the

surface. (Our winters, merciful y, are only 4 percent as long.)

Through the spring, they are slowly transformed, more and

more reddish organic molecules accumulating. By

summertime, the ice and snow have evaporated; the gases

so released migrate halfway across the planet to the winter

hemisphere and there cover the surface with ice and snow

again. But the reddish organic molecules do not vaporize

and are not transported—a lag deposit, they are next winter

covered over by new snows, which are in turn irradiated,

and by the fol owing summer the accumulation is thicker. As

time goes on, substantial amounts of organic matter are

built up on the surface of Triton, which may account for its

delicate color markings.

The streaks begin in smal , dark source regions, perhaps

when the warmth of spring and summer heats subsurface

volatile snows. As they vaporize, gas comes gushing out as

in a geyser, blowing off less-volatile surface snows and

dark organics. Prevailing low-speed winds carry away the

dark organics, which slowly sediment out of the thin air, are

deposited on the ground, and generate the appearance of

the streaks. This, at least, is one reconstruction of recent

Tritonian history.

Triton may have large, seasonal polar caps of smooth

nitrogen ice underlying layers of dark organic materials.

Nitrogen snows seem recently to have fal en at the equator.

Snowfal s, geysers, windblown organic dust, and high-

altitude hazes were entirely unexpected on a world with so

thin an atmosphere.

Why is the air so thin? Because Triton is so far from the

Sun. Were you somehow to pick this world up and move it

into orbit around Saturn, the nitrogen and methane ices

would quickly evaporate, a much denser atmosphere of

gaseous nitrogen and methane would form, and radiation

would generate an opaque tholin haze. It would become a

world very like Titan. Conversely, if you moved Titan into

orbit about Neptune, almost al its atmosphere would freeze

out as snows and ices, the tholin would fal out and not be

replaced, the air would clear, and the surface would

become visible in ordinary light. It would become a world

very like Triton.

These two worlds are not identical. The interior of Titan

seems to contain much more ice than that of Triton, and

much less rock. Titan's diameter is almost twice that of

Triton. Stil , if placed at the same distance from the Sun

they would look like sisters. Alan Stern of the Southwest

Research Institute suggests that they are two members of a

vast col ection of smal worlds rich in nitrogen and methane

that formed in the early Solar System. Pluto, yet to be

visited by a spacecraft, appears to be another member of

this group. Many more may await discovery beyond Pluto.

The thin atmospheres and icy surfaces of al these worlds

are being irradiated—by cosmic rays, if nothing else and

nitrogen—rich organic compounds are being formed. It

looks as if the stuff of life is sitting not just on Titan, but

throughout the cold, dimly lit outer reaches of our planetary

system.

Another class of smal objects has recently been

discovered, whose orbits take them—at least part of the

time—beyond Neptune and Pluto. Sometimes cal ed minor

planets or asteroids, they are more likely to be inactive

comets (with no tails, of course; so far from the Sun, their

ices cannot readily vaporize). But they are much bigger

than the run-of-the-mil comets we know. They may be the

vanguard of a vast array of smal worlds that extends from

the orbit of Pluto halfway to the nearest star. The innermost

province of the Oort Comet Cloud, of which these new

objects may be members, is cal ed the Kuiper Belt, after

my mentor Gerard Kuiper, who first suggested that it should

exist. Short-period comets—like Hal ey's—arise in the

Kuiper Belt, respond to gravitational tugs, sweep into the

inner part of the Solar System, grow their tails, and grace

our skies.

Back in the late nineteenth century, these building blocks

of

worlds—then

mere

hypotheses—were

cal ed

"planetesimals." The flavor of the word is, I suppose,

something like that of "infinitesimals": You need an infinite

number of them to make anything. It's not quite that extreme

with planetesimals, although a very large number of them

would be required to make a planet. For example, tril ions

of bodies each a kilometer in size would be needed to

coalesce to make a planet with the mass of the Earth. Once

there were much larger numbers of worldlets in the

planetary part of the Solar System. Most of them are now

gone—ejected into interstel ar space, fal en into the Sun, or

sacrificed in the great enterprise of building moons and

planets. But out beyond Neptune and Pluto the discards,

the leftovers that were never aggregated into worlds, may

be waiting—a few largish ones in the 100-kilometer range,

and stupefying numbers of kilometer-sized and smal er

bodies peppering the outer Solar System al the way out to

the Oort Cloud.

In this sense there are planets beyond Neptune and Pluto

—but they are not nearly as big as the Jovian planets, or

even Pluto. Larger worlds may, for al we know, also be

hiding in the dark beyond Pluto, worlds that can properly be

cal ed planets. The farther away they are, the less likely it is

that we would have detected them. They cannot lie just

beyond Neptune, though; their gravitational tugs would have

perceptibly altered the orbits of Neptune and Pluto, and the

Pioneer 10 and 11 and Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft.

The newly discovered cometary bodies (with names like

1992QB and 1993FW) are not planets in this sense. If our

detection threshold has just encompassed them, many

more of them probably remain to be discovered in the outer

Solar System—so far away that they're hard to see from

Earth, so distant that it's a long journey to get to them. But

smal , quick ships to Pluto and beyond are within our ability.

It would make good sense to dispatch one by Pluto and its

moon Charon, and then, if we can, to make a close pass by

one of the denizens of the Kuiper Comet Belt.

The rocky Earthlike cores of Uranus and Neptune seem

to have accreted first, and then gravitational y attracted

massive amounts of hydrogen and helium gas from the

ancient nebula out of which the planets formed. Original y,

they lived in a hailstorm. Their gravities were just sufficient

to eject icy worldlets, when they came too close, far out

beyond the realm of the planets, to populate the Oort

Comet Cloud. Jupiter and Saturn became gas giants by the

same process. But their gravities were too strong to

populate the Oort Cloud: Ice worlds that came close to

them were gravitational y pitched out of the Solar System

entirely—destined to wander forever in the great dark

between the stars.

So the lovely comets that on occasion rouse us humans

to wonder and to awe, that crater the surfaces of inner

planets and outer moons, and that now and then endanger

life on Earth would be unknown and unthreatening had

Uranus and Neptune not grown to be giant worlds four and

a half bil ion years ago.

THIS IS THE PLACE for a brief interlude on planets far beyond

Neptune and Pluto, planets of other stars.

Many nearby stars are surrounded by thin disks of

orbiting gas and dust, often extending to hundreds of

astronomical units (AU) from the local star (the outermost

planets, Neptune and Pluto, are about 40 AU from our Sun).

Younger Sun-like stars are much more likely to have disks

than older ones. In some cases, there's a hole in the center

of the disk as in a phonograph record. The hole extends out

from the star to perhaps 30 or 40 AU. This is true, for

example, for the disks surrounding the stars Vega and

Epsilon Eridam. The hole in the disk surrounding Beta

Pictoris extends to only 15 AU from the star. There is a real

possibility that these inner, dust-free zones have been

cleaned up by planets that recently formed there. Indeed,

this sweeping-out process is predicted for the early history

of our planetary system. As observations improve, perhaps

we wil see tel tale details in the configuration of dust and

dust-free zones that wil indicate the presence of planets

too smal and dark to be seen directly. Spectroscopic data

suggest that these disks are churning and that matter is

fal ing in on the central stars—perhaps from comets formed

in the disk, deflected by the unseen planets, and

evaporating as they approach too close to the local sun.

Because planets are smal and shine by reflected light,

they tend to be washed out in the glare of the local sun.

Nevertheless, many efforts are now under way to find ful y

formed planets around nearby stars—by detecting a faint

brief dimming of starlight as a dark planet interposes itself

between the star and the observer on Earth; or by sensing

a faint wobble in the motion of the star as it's tugged first

one way and then another by an otherwise invisible orbiting

companion. Spaceborne techniques wil be much more

sensitive. A Jovian planet going around a nearby star is

about a bil ion times fainter than its sun; nevertheless, a

new generation of ground-based telescopes that can

compensate for the twinkling in the Earth's atmosphere

may soon be able to detect such planets in only a few

hours' observing time. A terrestrial planet of a neighboring

star is a hundred times fainter stil ; but it now seems that

comparatively inexpensive spacecraft, above the Earth's

atmosphere, might be able to detect other Earths. None of

these searches has succeeded yet, but we are clearly on

the verge of being able to detect at least Jupiter-sized

planets around the nearest stars—if there are any to be

found.

A most important and serendipitous recent discovery is

of a bona fide planetary system around an unlikely star,

some 1,300 light-years away, found by a most unexpected

technique: The pulsar designated B1257+12 is a rapidly

rotating neutron star, an unbelievably dense sun, the

remnant of a massive star that suffered a supernova

explosion. It spins, at a rate measured to impressive

precision, once every 0.0062185319388187 seconds. This

pulsar is pushing 10,000 rpm.

Charged particles trapped in its intense magnetic field

generate radio waves that are cast across the Earth, about

160 flickers a second. Smal but discernible changes in the

flash rate were tentatively interpreted by Alexander

Wolszczan, now at Pennsylvania State University, in 1991

—as a tiny reflex motion of the pulsar in response to the

presence of planets. In 1994 the predicted mutual

gravitational interactions of these planets were confirmed

by Wolszczan from a study of timing residuals at the

microsecond level over the intervening years. The evidence

that these are truly new planets and not starquakes on the

neutron star surface (or something) is now overwhelming—

or, as Wolszczan put it, "irrefutable"; a new solar system is

"unambiguously identified." Unlike al the other techniques,

the pulsar timing method makes close-in terrestrial planets

comparatively easy and more distant Jovian planets

comparatively difficult to detect.

Planet C, some 2.8 times more massive than the Earth,

orbits the pulsar every 98 days at a distance of 0.47

astronomical units[§§§§] (AU); Planet B, with about 3.4

Earth masses, has a 67-Earth-day year at 0.36 AU. A

smal er world, Planet A, stil closer to the star, with about

0.015 Earth masses, is at 0.19 AU. Crudely speaking,

Planet B is roughly at the distance of Mercury from our Sun;

Planet C is midway between the distances of Mercury and

Venus; and interior to both of them is Planet A, roughly the

mass of the Moon at about half Mercury's distance from our

Sun. Whether these planets are the remnants of an earlier

planetary system that somehow survived the supernova

explosion that produced the pulsar, or whether they formed

from the resulting circumstel ar accretion disk subsequent

to the supernova explosion, we do not know. But in either

case, we have now learned that there are other Earths.

The energy put out by B1257+12 is about 4.7 times

that of gun. But, unlike the Sun, most of this is not in visible

light, but in a fierce hurricane of electrical y charged

particles. Suppose that these particles impinge on the

planets and heat them. Then, even a planet at 1 AU would

have a surface around 280 Celsius degrees above the

normal boiling point of water, greater than the temperature

of Venus.

These dark and broiling planets do not seem

hospitable for life. But there may be others, farther from

B1257+12, that are. (Hints of at least one cooler, outer

world in the B1257+12 system exist.) Of course, we don't

even know that such worlds would retain their atmospheres;

perhaps any atmospheres were stripped away in the

supernova explosion, if they date back that far. But we do

seem to be detecting a recognizable planetary system.

Many more are likely to become known in coming decades,

around ordinary Sun-like stars as wel as white dwarfs,

pulsars, and other end states of stel ar evolution.

Eventual y, we wil have a list of planetary systems—

each perhaps with terrestrials and Jovians and maybe new

classes of planets. We wil examine these worlds,

spectroscopical y and in other ways. We wil be searching

for new Earths and other life.

ON NONE OF THE WORLDS In the outer Solar System did

Voyager find signs of life, much less intel igence. There

was organic Matter galore—the stuff of life, the

premonitions of life, perhaps but as far as we could see, no

life. There was no oxygen in their atmospheres, and no

gases profoundly out of chemical equilibrium, as methane

is in the Earth's oxygen. Many of the worlds were painted

with subtle colors, but none with such distinctive, sharp

absorption features as chlorophyl provides over much of

the Earth's surface. On very few worlds was Voyager able

to resolve details as smal as a kilometer across. By this

standard, it would not have detected even our own technical

civilization had it been transplanted to the outer Solar

System. But for what it's worth, we found no regular

patterning, no geometrization, no passion for smal circles,

triangles, squares, or rectangles. There were no

constel ations of steady points of light on the night

hemispheres. There were no signs of a technical civilization

reworking the surface of any of these worlds.

The Jovian planets are prolific broadcasters of radio

waves—generated in part by the abundant trapped and

beamed charged particles in their magnetic fields, in part

by lightning, and in part by their hot interiors. But none of

this emission has the character of intel igent life—or so it

seems to the experts in the field.

Of course our thinking may be too narrow. We may

be missing something. For example, there is a little carbon

dioxide in the atmosphere of Titan, which puts its

nitrogen/methane atmosphere out of chemical equilibrium. I

think the CO2 is provided by the steady pitter-patter of

comets fal ing into Titan's atmosphere—but maybe not.

Maybe there's something on the surface unaccountably

generating CO2 in the face of al that methane.

The surfaces of Miranda and Triton are unlike anything

else we know. There are vast chevron-shaped landforms

and crisscrossing straight lines that even sober planetary

geologists once mischievously described as "highways."

We think we (barely) understand these landforms in terms

of faults and col isions, but of course we might be wrong.

The surface stains of organic matter—sometimes, as on

Triton, delicately hued—are attributed to charged particles

producing chemical reactions in simple hydrocarbon ices,

generating more complex organic materials, and al this

having nothing to do with the intermediation of life. But of

course we might be wrong.

The complex pattern of radio static, bursts, and whistles

that we receive from al four Jovian planets seems, in a

general way, explicable by plasma physics and thermal

emission. (Much of the detail is not yet wel understood.)

But of course we might be wrong.

We have found nothing on dozens of worlds so clear and

striking as the signs of life found by the Galileo spacecraft

in its passages by the Earth. Life is a hypothesis of last

resort. You invoke it only when there's no other way to

explain what you see. If I had to judge, I would say that

there's no life on any of the worlds we've studied, except of

course our own. But I might be wrong, and, right or wrong,

my judgment is necessarily confined to this Solar System.

Perhaps on some new mission we'l find something

different, something striking, something whol y inexplicable

with the ordinary tools of planetary science—and

tremulously, cautiously, we wil inch toward a biological

explanation. However, for now nothing requires that we go

down such a path. So far, the only life in the Solar System is

that which comes from Earth. In the Uranus and Neptune

systems, the only sign of life has been Voyager itself.

As we identify the planets of other stars, as we find other

worlds of roughly the size and mass of the Earth, we wil

scrutinize them for life. A dense oxygen atmosphere may

be detectable even on a world we've never imaged. As for

the Earth, that may by itself be a sign of life. An oxygen

atmosphere with appreciable quantities of methane would

almost certainly be a sign of life, as would modulated radio

emission. Someday, from observations of our planetary

system or another, the news of life elsewhere may be

announced over the morning coffee.

THE VOYAGER SPACECRAFT are bound for the stars. They are on

escape trajectories from the Solar System, barreling along

at almost a mil ion miles a day. The gravitational fields of

Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune have flung them at

such high speeds that they have broken the bonds that

once tied them to the Sun.

Have they left the Solar System yet? The answer

depends very much on how you define the boundary of the

Sun's realm. If it's the orbit of the outermost good-sized

planet, then the Voyager spacecraft are already long gone;

there are probably no undiscovered Neptunes. If you mean

the outermost planet, it may be that there are other—

perhaps Triton-like—planets far beyond Neptune and Pluto;

if so, Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 are stil within the Solar

System. If you define the outer limits of the Solar System as

the heliopause—where the interplanetary particles and

magnetic fields are replaced by their interstel ar

counterparts—then neither Voyager has yet left the Solar

System, although they may do so in the next few

decades.[*****] But if your definition of the edge of the

Solar System is the distance at which our star can no

longer hold worlds in orbit about it, then the Voyager s wil

not leave the Solar System for hundreds of centuries.

Weakly grasped by the Sun's gravity, in every direction in

the sky, is that immense horde of a tril ion comets or more,

the port Cloud. The two spacecraft wil finish their passage

through

the Oort cloud in another 20,000 years or so. Then, at last,

completing their long good-bye to the Solar System, broken

free of the gravitational shackles that once bound them to

the Sun, the Voyager s wil make for the open sea of

interstel ar space. only then wil Phase Two of their mission

begin.

Their radio transmitters long dead, the spacecraft wil

wander for ages in the calm, cold interstel ar blackness—

where there is almost nothing to erode them. Once out of

the Solar System, they wil remain intact for a bil ion years

or more, as they circumnavigate the center of the Milky Way

galaxy.

We do not know whether there are other space-faring

civilizations in the Milky Way. If they do exist, we do not

know how abundant they are, much less where they are. But

there is at least a chance that sometime in the remote

future one of the Voyager s wil be intercepted and

examined by an alien craft.

Accordingly, as each Voyager left Earth for the

planets and the stars, it carried with it a golden phonograph

record encased in a golden, mirrored jacket containing,

among other things; greetings in 59 human languages and

one whale language; a 12-minute sound essay including a

kiss, a baby's cry, and an EEG record of the meditations of

a young woman in love; 116 encoded pictures, on our

science, our civilization, and ourselves; and 90 minutes of

the Earth's greatest hits—Eastern and Western, classical

and folk, including a Navajo night chant, a Japanese

shakuhachi piece, a Pygmy girl's initiation song, a

Peruvian wedding song, a 3,000-year-old composition for

t h e ch'in cal ed "Flowing Streams," Bach, Beethoven,

Mozart, Stravinsky, Louis Armstrong, Blind Wil ie Johnson,

and Chuck Berry's "Johnny B. Goode."

Space is nearly empty. There is virtual y no chance that

one of the Voyager s wil ever enter another solar system—

and this is true even if every star in the sky is accompanied

by planets. The instructions on the record jackets, written in

what we believe to be readily comprehensible scientific

hieroglyphics, can be read, and the contents of the records

understood, only if alien beings, somewhere in the remote

future, find Voyager in the depths of interstel ar space.

Since both Voyager s wil circle the center of the Milky Way

Galaxy essential y forever, there is plenty of time for the

records to be found—if there's anyone out there to do the

finding.

We cannot know how much of the records they would

understand. Surely the greetings wil be incomprehensible,

but their intent may not be. (We thought it would be impolite

not to say hel o.) The hypothetical aliens are bound to be

very different from us—independently evolved on another

world. Are we real y sure they could understand anything at

al of our message? Every time I feel these concerns

stirring, though, I reassure myself. Whatever the

incomprehensibilities of the Voyager record, any alien ship

that finds it wil have another standard by which to judge us.

E a c h Voyager is itself a message. In their exploratory

intent, in the lofty ambition of their objectives, in their utter

lack of intent to do harm, and in the bril iance of their design

and performance, these robots speak eloquently for us.

But being much more advanced scientists and engineers

than we—otherwise they would never be able to find and

retrieve the smal , silent spacecraft in interstel ar space—

perhaps the aliens would have no difficulty understanding

what is encoded on these golden records. Perhaps they

would recognize the tentativeness of our society, the

mismatch between our technology and our wisdom. Have

we destroyed ourselves since launching Voyager, they

might wonder, or have we gone on to greater things?

might wonder, or have we gone on to greater things?

Or perhaps the records wil never be intercepted.

Perhaps no one in five bil ion years wil ever come

upon them. Five bil ion years is a long time. In five

bil ion years, al humans wil have become extinct or

evolved into other beings, none of our artifacts wil

have survived on Earth, the continents wil have

become unrecognizably altered or destroyed, and the

evolution of the Sun wil have burned the Earth to a

crisp or reduced it to a whirl of atoms.

Far from home, untouched by these remote events, the

Voyager s, bearing the memories of a world that is no

more, wil fly on.

C H A P

T E R 10

SACRED BLACK

Deep sky is, of all visual impressions, the

nearest akin to a feeling.





—SAMUEL

TAYLOR

COLERIDGE,

NOTEBOOKS (1805)

The blue of a cloudless May morning, or the reds and

oranges of a sunset at sea, have roused humans to

wonder, to poetry, and to science. No matter where on

Earth we live, no matter what our language, customs, or

politics, we share a sky in common. Most of us expect that

azure blue and would, for good reason, be stunned to wake

up one sunrise to find a cloudless sky that was black or

yel ow or green. (Inhabitants of Los Angeles and Mexico

City have grown accustomed to brown skies, and those of

London and Seattle to gray ones—but even they stil

consider blue the planetary norm.)

And yet there are worlds with black or yel ow skies, and

maybe even green. The color of the sky characterizes the

world. Plop me down on any planet in the Solar System;

without sensing the gravity, without glimpsing the ground, let

me take a quick look at the Sun and sky, and I can, I think,

pretty wel tel you where I am. That familiar shade of blue,

interrupted here and there by fleecy white clouds, is a

signature of our world. The French have an expression,

sacre-bleu!,

which

translates

roughly

as

"Good

heavens!"[†††††] Literal y, it means "sacred blue!"

Indeed. If there ever is a true flag of Earth, this should be its

color.

Birds fly through it, clouds are suspended in it, humans

admire and routinely traverse it, light from the Sun and stars

flutters through it. But what is it? What is it made of? Where

does it end? How much of it is there? Where does al that

blue come from? If it's a commonplace for al humans, if it

typifies our world, surely we should know something about

it. What is the sky?

In August 1957, for the first time, a human being rose

above the blue and looked around—when David Simons, a

retired Air Force officer and a physician, became the

highest human in history. Alone, he piloted a bal oon to an

altitude of over 100,000 feet (30 kilometers) and through

his thick windows glimpsed a different sky. Now a

professor at the University of California Medical School in

Irvine, Dr. Simons recal s it was a dark, deep purple

overhead. He had reached the transition region where the

blue of ground level is being overtaken by the perfect black

of space.

Since Simons' almost forgotten flight, people of many

nations have flown above the atmosphere. It is now clear

from repeated and direct human (and robotic) experience

that in space the daytime sky is black. The Sun shines

brightly on your ship. The Earth below you is bril iantly

il uminated. But the sky above is black as night.

Here is the memorable description by Yuri Gagarin of

what he saw on the first spaceflight of the human species,

aboard Vostok 1, on April 12, 1961:

The sky is completely black; and against the background of this

black sky the stars appear somewhat brighter and more

distinct. The Earth has a very characteristic, very beautiful blue

halo, which is seen well when you observe the horizon. There

is a smooth color transition from tender blue, to blue, to dark

blue and purple, and then to the completely black color of the

sky. It is a very beautiful transition.

Clearly, the daylit sky—al that blue— is somehow

connected with the air. But as you look across the breakfast

table, your companion is not (usual y) blue; the color of the

sky must be a property not of a little air, but of a great deal.

If you look closely at the Earth from space, you see it

surrounded by a thin band of blue, as thick as the lower

atmosphere; indeed, it is the lower atmosphere. At the top

of that band you can make out the blue sky fading into the

blackness of space. This is the transition zone that Simons

was the first to enter and Gagarin the first to observe from

above. In routine spaceflight, you start at the bottom of the

blue, penetrate entirely through it a few minutes after liftoff;

and then enter that boundless realm where a simple

breath of air is impossible without elaborate life-support

systems. Human life depends for its very existence on that

blue sky. We are right to consider it tender and sacred.

We see the blue in daytime because sunlight is bouncing

off the air around and above us. On a cloudless night, the

sky is black because there is no sufficiently intense source

of light to be reflected off the air. Somehow, the air

preferential y bounces blue light down to us. How?

The visible light from the Sun comes in many colors—

violet, blue, green, yel ow, orange, red—corresponding to

light of different wavelengths. (A wavelength is the distance

front crest to crest as the wave travels through air or

space.) Violet and blue light waves have the shortest

wavelengths; orange and red the longest. What we

perceive as color is how our eyes and brains read the

wavelengths of light. (We Might just as reasonably translate

wavelengths of light into, say, heard tones rather than seen

colors—but that's not how our senses evolved.)

When al those rainbow colors of the spectrum are mixed

together, as in sunlight, they seem almost white. These

waves travel together in eight minutes across the

intervening 93 mil ion miles (150 mil ion kilometers) of

space from the Sun to the Earth. They strike the

atmosphere, which is made mostly of nitrogen and oxygen

molecules. Some waves are reflected by the air back into

space. Some are bounced around before the light reaches

the ground and they can be detected by a passing eyebal .

(Also, some bounce off clouds or the ground back into

space.) This bouncing around of light waves in the

atmosphere is cal ed "scattering."

But not al waves are equal y wel scattered by the

molecules of air. Wavelengths that are much longer than the

size of the molecules are scattered less; they spil over the

molecules,

hardly

influenced

by

their

presence.

Wavelengths that are closer to the size of the molecules are

scattered snore. And waves have trouble ignoring

obstacles as big as they are. (You can see this in water

waves scattered by the pilings of piers, or bathtub waves

from a dripping faucet encountering a rubber duck.) The

shorter wavelengths, those that we sense as violet and blue

light, are more efficiently scattered than the longer

wavelengths, those that we sense as orange and red light.

When we look up on a cloudless day and admire the blue

sky, we are witnessing the preferential scattering of the

short waves in sunlight. This is cal ed Rayleigh scattering,

after the English physicist who offered the first coherent

explanation for it. Cigarette smoke is blue for just the same

reason: The particles that make it up are about as smal as

the wavelength of blue light.

So why is the sunset red? The red of the sunset is what's

left of sunlight after the air scatters the blue away. Since the

atmosphere is a thin shel of gravitational y bound gas

surrounding the solid Earth, sunlight must pass through a

longer slant path of air at sunset (or sunrise) than at noon.

Since the violet and blue waves are scattered even more

during their now-longer path through the air than when the

Sun is overhead, what we see when we look toward the

Sun is the residue—the waves of sunlight that are hardly

scattered away at al , especial y the oranges and reds. A

blue sky makes a red sunset. (The noontime Sun seems

yel owish partly because it emits slightly more yel ow light

than other colors, and partly because, even with the Sun

overhead, some blue light is scattered out of the sunbeams

by the Earth's atmosphere.)

It is sometimes said that scientists are unromantic, that

their passion to figure out robs the world of beauty and

mystery. But is it not stirring to understand how the world

actual y works—that white light is made of colors, that color

is the way we perceive the wavelengths of light, that

transparent air reflects light, that in so doing it discriminates

among the waves, and that the sky is blue for the same

reason that the sunset is red? It does no harm to the

romance of the sunset to know a little bit about it.

Since most simple molecules are about the same size

(roughly a hundred mil ionth of a centimeter), the blue of the

Earth's sky doesn't much depend on what the air is made of

—as long as the air doesn't absorb the light. Oxygen and

nitrogen molecules don't absorb visible light; they only

bounce it away in some other direction. Other molecules,

though, can gobble up the light. Oxides of nitrogen—

produced in automotive engines and in the fires of industry

—are a source of the murky brown coloration of smog.

Oxides of nitrogen (made from oxygen and nitrogen) do

absorb light. Absorption, as wel as scattering, can color a

sky.

OTHER WORLDS, OTHER SKIES: Mercury, the Earth's Moon, and

most satel ites of the other planets are smal worlds;

because of their feeble gravities, they are unable to retain

their atmospheres—which instead trickle of into space. The

near-vacuum of space then reaches the ground. Sunlight

strikes their surfaces unimpeded, neither scattered nor

absorbed along the way. The skies of these worlds are

black, even at noon. This has been witnessed firsthand so

far by only 12 humans, the lunar landing crews of Apollos

11, 12, and 14-17.

A ful list of the satel ites in the Solar System, known as of

this writing, is given in the accompanying table. (Nearly half

of them were discovered by Voyager.) Al have black skies

—except Titan of Saturn and perhaps Triton of Neptune,

which are big enough to have atmospheres. And al

asteroids as wel .

Venus has about 90 times more air than Earth. It isn't

mainly oxygen and nitrogen as here—it's carbon dioxide.

But carbon dioxide doesn't absorb visible light either. What

would the sky look like from the surface of Venus if Venus

had no clouds. With so much atmosphere in the way, not

only are violet and blue waves scattered, but al the other

colors as wel -green yel ow, orange, red. The air is so thick,

though, that hardly any blue light makes it to the ground; it's

scattered back to space by successive bounces higher up.

Thus, the light that does reach the ground should be

strongly reddened-like an Earth sunset al over the sky.

Further, sulfur in the high clouds wil stain the sky yel ow.

Pictures taken by the Soviet Venera landers confirm that

the skies of Venus are a kind of yel ow-orange.

SIXTY-TWO WORLDS FOR THE THIRD MILLENNIUM:

KNOWN MOONS OF THE PLANETS (AND ONE ASTEROID)—

LISTED IN ORDER OF DISTANCE FROM THEIR PLANET

EARTH,

NEPTUNE,

MARS, 2

IDA, 1

JUPITER, 16

SATURN, 18

URANUS, 15

PLUT0, 1

1

8

Moon

Phobos

Dactyl

Metis

Pan

Cordelia

Naiad

Charon

Deimos

Adrastea

Atlas

Ophelia

Thalassa

Amalthea

Prometheus

Bianca

Despina

Thebe

Pandora

Cressida

Galatea

to

Epimetheus

Desdemona

Larissa

Europa

Janus

Juliet

Proteus

Ganymede

Mimas

Portia

Triton

Cal isto

Enceladus

Rosalind

Nereid

Leda

Tethys

Belinda

Himalia

Telesto

Puck

Lysithea

Calypso

Miranda

Elara

Diane

Ariel

Ananke

Helene

Umbriel

Carme

Rhea

Titania

Pasiphae

Titan

Oberon

Sinope

Hyperion

Iapetus

Phoebe

Mars is a different story. It is a smal er world than Earth,

with a much thinner atmosphere. The pressure at the

surface of Mars is, in fact, about the same as the altitude in

the Earth's stratosphere to which Simons rose. So we

might expect the Martian sky to be black or purple-black.

The first color picture from the surface of Mars was

obtained in July 1976 by the American Viking 1 lander—

the first spacecraft to touch down successful y on the

surface of the Red Planet. The digital data were dutiful y

radioed from Mars back to Earth, and the color picture

assembled by computer. To the surprise of al the scientists

and nobody else, that first image, released to the press,

showed the Martian sky to be a comfortable, homey blue—

impossible for a planet with so insubstantial an

atmosphere. Something had gone wrong.

The picture on your color television set is a mixture of

three monochrome images, each in a different color of light

—red, green, and blue. You can see this method of color

compositing in video projection systems, which project

separate beams of red, green, and blue light to generate a

ful -color picture (including yel ows). To get the right color,

your set needs to mix or balance these three monochrome

images correctly. If you turn up the intensity of, say, blue, the

picture wil appear too blue. Any picture returned from

space requires a similar color balance. Considerable

discretion is sometimes left to the computer analysts in

deciding this balance. The hi ki ng analysts were not

planetary astronomers, and with this first color picture from

Mars they simply mixed the colors until it looked "right." We

are so conditioned by our experience on Earth that "right,"

of course, means a blue sky. The color of the picture was

soon corrected—using color calibration standards placed

for this very purpose on board the spacecraft—and the

resulting composite showed no blue sky at al ; rather it was

something between ochre and pink. Not blue, but hardly

purple-black either.

This is the right color of the Martian sky. Much of the

surface of Mars is desert—and red because the sands are

rusk. There are occasional violent sandstorms that lift fine

particles from the surface high into the atmosphere. It takes

a long time for them to fal out, and before the sky has ful y

cleaned itself, there's always another sandstorm. Global or

near-global sandstorms occur almost every Martian year.

Since rusty particles are always suspended in this sky,

future generations of humans, born and living out their lives

on Mars, wil consider that salmon color to be as natural

and familiar as we consider our homey blue. From a single

glance at the daytime sky, they'l probably be able to tel

how long it's been since the last big sandstorm.

The planets in the outer Solar System—Jupiter,

Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune— are of a different sort.

These are huge worlds with giant atmospheres made

mainly of hydrogen and helium. Their solid surfaces are so

deep inside that no sunlight penetrates there at al . Down

there, the sky is black, with no prospect of a sunrise—not

ever. The perpetual starless night is perhaps il uminated on

occasion by a bolt of lightning. But higher in the

atmosphere, where the sunlight reaches, a much more

beautiful vista awaits.

On Jupiter, above a high-altitude haze layer composed of

ammonia (rather than water) ice particles, the sky is almost

black. Farther down, in the blue sky region, are multicolored

clouds—in various shades of yel ow-brown, and of unknown

composition. (The candidate materials include sulfur,

phosphorus, and complex organic molecules.) Even farther

down, the sky wil appear red-brown, except that the clouds

there are of varying thicknesses, and where they are thin,

you might see a patch of blue. Stil deeper, we gradual y

return to perpetual night. Something similar is true on

Saturn, but the colors there are more muted.

Uranus and especial y Neptune have an uncanny, austere

blue color through which clouds—some of them a little

whiter—are carried by high-speed winds. Sunlight reaches

a comparatively clean atmosphere composed mainly of

hydrogen and helium but also rich in methane. Long paths

of methane absorb yel ow and especial y red light and let

the green and blue filter through. A thin hydrocarbon haze

removes a little blue. There may be a depth where the sky

is greenish.

Conventional wisdom holds that the absorption by

methane and the Rayleigh scattering of sunlight by the

deep atmosphere together account for the blue colors on

Uranus and Neptune. But analysis of Voyager data by

Kevin Baines of JPL seems to show that these causes are

insufficient. Apparently very deep—maybe in the vicinity of

hypothesized clouds of hydrogen sulfide—there is an

abundant blue substance. So far no one has been able to

figure out what it might be. Blue materials are very rare in

Nature. As always happens in science, the old mysteries

are dispel ed only to be replaced by new ones. Sooner or

later we'l find out the answer to this one, too.

ALL WORLDS WITH NONBLACK SKIES have atmospheres. If you're

standing on the surface and there's an atmosphere thick

enough to see, there's probably a way to fly through it.

We're now sending our instruments to fly in the variously

colored skies of other worlds. Someday we wil go

ourselves.

Parachutes have already been used in the atmospheres

of Venus and Mars, and are planned for Jupiter and Titan.

In 1985 two French-Soviet bal oons sailed through the

yel ow skies of Venus. The Vega 9 bal oon, about 4 meters

across, dangled an instrument package 13 meters below.

The bal oon inflated in the night hemisphere, floated about

54 kilometers above the surface, and transmitted data for

almost two Earth days before its batteries failed. In that

time it traveled 11,600 kilometers (nearly 7,000 miles) over

the surface of Venus, far below. The Vega 2 bal oon had an

almost identical profile. The atmosphere of Venus has also

been used for aerobraking—changing the Magellan

spacecraft's orbit by friction with the dense air; this is a key

future technology for converting flyby spacecraft to Mars

into orbiters and landers.

A Mars mission, scheduled to be launched in 1998, and

led by Russia, includes an enormous French hot air bal oon

—looking something like a vast jel yfish, a Portuguese man-

of-war. It's designed to sink to the Martian surface every

chil y twilight and rise high when heated by sunlight the next

day. The winds are so fast that, if al goes wel , it wil be

carried hundreds of kilometers each day, hopping and

skipping over the north pole. In the early morning, when

close to the ground, it wil obtain very high resolution

pictures and other data. The bal oon has an instrumental

guide-rope, essential for its stability, conceived and

designed by a private membership organization based in

Pasadena, California, The Planetary Society.

Since the surface pressure on Mars is approximately that

at an altitude of 100,000 feet on Earth, we know we can fly

airplanes there. The U-2, for example, or the SR-71

Blackbird routinely approaches such low pressures.

Aircraft with even larger wingspans have been designed for

Mars.

The dream of flight and the dream of space travel are

twins, conceived by similar visionaries, dependent on al ied

technologies, and evolving more or less in tandem. As

certain practical and economic limits to flight on Earth are

reached, the possibility arises of flying through the

multihued skies of other worlds.

IT IS NOW ALMOST POSSIBLE to assign color combinations,

based on the colors of clouds and sky, to every planet in the

Solar System—from the sulfur-stained skies of Venus and

the rusty skies of Mars to the aquamarine of Uranus and the

hypnotic and unearthly blue of Neptune. Sacre-jaunt, sacre-

rouge, sacre-vert. Perhaps they wil one day adorn the flags

of distant human outposts in the Solar System, in that time

when the new frontiers are sweeping out from the Sun to

the stars, and the explorers are surrounded by the endless

black of space. Sacre-noir.





C H A P

T E R 11

EVENING AND



MORNING

STAR

This

is

another

world

Which is

not

of

men.

—LI BAI,

"QUESTION AND ANSWER IN THE

MOUNTAINS"

(CHINA,

TANG

DYNASTY,

CA. 730)

You can see it shining briliantly in the twilight, chasing the

Sun down below the western horizon. Upon first glimpsing it

each night, people were accustomed to make a wish

("upon a star"). Sometimes the wish came true.

Or you can spy it in the east before dawn, fleeing the

rising Sun. In these two incarnations, brighter than anything

else in the sky except only the Sun and the Moon it was

known as the evening and the morning star. Our ancestors

did not recognize it was a world, the same world, never too

far from the Sun because it is in an orbit about it interior to

the Earth's. Just before sunset or just after sunrise, we can

sometimes see it near some fluffy white cloud, and then

discover by the comparison that Venus has a color, a pale

lemon-yel ow.

You peer through the eyepiece of a telescope—even a

big telescope, even the largest optical telescope on Earth

—and you can make out no detail at al . Over the months,

you see a featureless disk methodical y going through

phases, like the Moon: crescent Venus, ful Venus, gibbous

Venus, new Venus. There is not a hint of continents or

oceans.

Some of the first astronomers to see Venus through

the telescope immediately recognized that they were

examining a world enshrouded by clouds. The clouds, we

now know, are droplets of concentrated sulfuric acid,

stained yel ow by a little elemental sulfur. They lie high

above the ground. In ordinary visible light there's no hint of

what this planet's surface, some 50 kilometers below the

cloud tops, is like, and for centuries the best we had were

wild guesses.

You might conjecture that if we could take a much

finer look there might be breaks in the clouds, revealing day

by day, in bits and pieces, the mysterious surface ordinarily

hidden from our view. Then the time of guesses would be

over. The Earth is on average half cloud-covered. In the

early days of Venus exploration, we saw no reason that

Venus should be 100 percent overcast. If instead it was

only 90 percent, or even 99 percent, cloud-covered, the

transient patches of clearing might tel us much.

In 1960 and 1961, Mariners 1 and 2, the first American

spacecraft designed to visit Venus, were being prepared.

There were those, like me, who thought the ships should

carry video cameras so they could radio pictures back to

Earth. The same technology would be used a few years

later when Rangers 7, 8, and 9 would photograph the Moon

on the way to their crash landings—the last making a bul 's-

eye in the crater Alphonsus. But time was short for the

Venus mission, and cameras were heavy. There were

those who maintained that cameras weren't real y scientific

instruments, but rather catch-as-catch-can, razzle-dazzle,

pandering to the public, and unable to answer a single

straightforward, wel -posed scientific question. I thought

myself that whether there are breaks in the clouds was one

such question. I argued that cameras could also answer

questions that we were too dumb even to pose. I argued

that pictures were the only way to show the public—who

were, after al , footing the bil —the excitement of robotic

missions. At any rate, no camera was flown, and

subsequent missions have, for this particular world, at least

partly vindicated that judgment: Even at high resolution from

close flybys, in visible light it turns out there are no breaks in

the clouds of Venus, any more than in the clouds of

Titan.[‡‡‡‡‡] These worlds are permanently overcast.

In the ultraviolet there is detail, but due to transient

patches of high-altitude overcast, far above the main cloud

deck. The high clouds race around the planet much faster

than the planet itself turns: super-rotation. We have an even

smal er chance of seeing the surface in the ultraviolet.

When it became clear that the atmosphere of Venus was

much thicker than the air on Earth—as we now know, the

pressure at the surface is ninety times what it is here—it

immediately fol owed that in ordinary visible light we could

not possibly see the surface, even if there were breaks in

the clouds. What little sunlight is able to make its tortuous

way through the dense atmosphere to the surface would be

reflected back, al right; but the photons would be so

jumbled by repeated scattering off molecules in the lower

air that no image of surface features could be retained. It

would be like a "whiteout" in polar snowstorm. However,

this effect, intense Rayleigh scattering, declines rapidly with

increasing wavelength; in the near-infrared, it was easy to

calculate, you could see the surface if there were breaks in

the clouds or if the clouds were transparent there.

So in 1970 Jim Pol ack, Dave Morrison, and I went to the

McDonald Observatory of the University of Texas to try to

observe Venus in the near-infrared. We "hypersensitized"

our emulsions; the good old-fashioned[§§§§§] glass

photographic plates were treated with ammonia, and

sometimes heated or briefly il uminated, before being

exposed at the telescope to light from Venus. For a time

the cel ars of McDonald Observatory reeked of ammonia.

We took many pictures. None showed any detail. We

concluded that either we hadn't gone far enough into the

infrared or the clouds of Venus were opaque and unbroken

in the near infrared.

More than 20 years later, the Galileo spacecraft, making

a close flyby of Venus, examined it with higher resolution

and sensitivity, and at wavelengths a little further into the

infrared than we were able to reach with our crude glass

emulsions. Galileo photographed great mountain ranges.

We already knew of their existence, though; a much more

powerful technique had earlier been employed: radar.

Radio waves effortlessly penetrate the clouds and thick

atmosphere of Venus, bounce off the surface, and return to

Earth, where they are gathered in and used to make a

picture. The first work had been done, chiefly, by. American

ground-based radar at JPL's Goldstone tracking station in

the Mojave Desert and at the Arecibo Observatory in

Puerto Rico, operated by Cornel University.

Then the U.S. Pioneer 12, the Soviet Venera 15 and ?6

and the U.S. Magellan missions inserted radar telescopes

into orbit around Venus and mapped the place pole to pole.

Each spacecraft would transmit a radar signal to the

surface and then catch it as it bounced back. From how

reflective each patch of surface was and how long it took

the signal to return (shorter from mountains, longer from

val eys), a detailed map of the entire surface was slowly

and painstakingly constructed.

The world so revealed turns out to be uniquely sculpted

by lava flows (and, to a much lesser degree, by wind), as

described in the next chapter. The clouds and atmosphere

of Venus have now become transparent to us, and another

world has been visited by the doughty robot explorers from

Earth. Our experience with Venus is now being applied

elsewhere—especial y to Titan, where once again

impenetrable clouds hide an enigmatic surface, and radar

is beginning to give us hints of what might lie below.

VENUS HAD LONG BEEN THOUGHT of as our sister world. It is the

nearest planet to the Earth. It has almost the same mass,

size, density, and gravitational pul as the Earth does. It's a

little closer to the Sun than the Earth, but its bright clouds

reflect more sunlight back to space than our clouds do. As

a first guess you might very wel imagine that, under those

unbroken clouds, Venus was rather like Earth. Early

scientific speculation included fetid swamps crawling with

monster amphibians, like the Earth in the Carboniferous

Period; a world desert; a global petroleum sea; and a

seltzer ocean dotted here and there with limestone-

encrusted islands. While based on some scientific data,

these “models" of Venus—the first dating from the

beginnings of the century, the second from the 1930s, and

the last two from the raid-1950s—were little more than

scientific romances, hardly constrained by the sparse data

available.

Then, in 1956, a report was published in The

Astrophysical

Journal by Cornel H. Mayer and his

col eagues. They had pointed a newly completed radio

telescope, built in part for classified research, on the roof of

the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C., at

Venus and measured the flux of radio waves arriving at

Earth. This was not radar: No radio waves were bounced

off Venus. This was listening to radio waves that Venus on

its own emits to space. Venus turned out to be much

brighter than the background of distant stars and galaxies.

This in itself was not very surprising. Every object warmer

than absolute zero (-273°C) gives off radiation throughout

the electromagnetic spectrum, including the radio region.

You, for example, emit radio waves at an effective or

"brightness" temperature of about 35°C, and if you were in

surroundings colder than you are, a sensitive radio

telescope could detect the faint radio waves you are

transmitting in al directions. Each of us is a source of cold

static.

What was surprising about Mayer's discovery was that

the brightness temperature of Venus is more than 300°C,

far higher than the surface temperature of the Earth or the

measured infrared temperature of the clouds of Venus.

Some places on Venus seemed at least 200° hotter than

the normal boiling point of water. What could this mean?

Soon there was a deluge of explanations. I argued that

the high radio brightness temperature was a direct

indication of a hot surface, and that the high temperatures

were due to a massive carbon dioxide/water vapor

greenhouse effect—in which some sunlight is transmitted

through the clouds and heats the Surface, but the surface

experiences enormous difficulty in radiating back to space

because of the high infrared opacity of carbon dioxide and

water vapor. Carbon dioxide absorbs at a range of

wavelengths through the infrared, but there seemed to be

"windows" between the CO2 absorption bands through

which the surface could readily cool off to space. Water

vapor, though, absorbs at infrared frequencies that

correspond in part to the windows in the carbon dioxide

opacity. The two gases together, it seemed to me, could

pretty wel absorb almost al the infrared emission, even if

there was very little water vapor—something like two picket

fences, the slats of one being fortuitously positioned to

cover the gaps of the other.

There was another very different category of explanation,

in which the high brightness temperature of Venus had

nothing to do with the ground. The surface could stil be

temperate, clement, congenial. It was proposed that some

region in the atmosphere of Venus or in its surrounding

magnetosphere emitted these radio waves to space.

Electrical discharges between water droplets in the Venus

clouds were suggested. A glow discharge in which ions

and electrons recombined at twilight and dawn in the upper

atmosphere was offered. A very dense ionosphere had its

advocates, in which the mutual acceleration of unbound

electrons ("free-free emission") gave off radio waves. (One

proponent of this idea even suggested that the high

ionization required was due to an average of 10,000 times

greater radioactivity on Venus than on Earth—perhaps

from a recent nuclear war there.) And, in the light of the

discovery of radiation from Jupiter's magnetosphere, it was

natural to suggest that the radio emission came from an

immense cloud of charged particles trapped by some

hypothetical very intense Venusian magnetic field.

In a series of papers I published in the middle 1960s,

many in col aboration with Jim Pol ack,[******] these

conflicting models of a high hot emitting region and a cold

surface were subjected to a critical analysis. By then we

had two important new clues: the radio spectrum of Venus,

and the Mariner 2 evidence that the radio emission was

more intense at the center of the disk of Venus than toward

its edge. By 1967 we were able to exclude the alternative

models with some confidence, and conclude that the

surface of Venus was at a scorching and un-Earthlike

temperature, in excess of 400°C. But the argument was

inferential, and there were many intermediate steps. We

longed for a more direct measurement.

In October 1967—commemorating the tenth anniversary

of Sputnik 1—the Soviet Venera 4 spacecraft dropped an

entry capsule into the clouds of Venus. It returned data from

the hot lover atmosphere, but did not survive to the surface.

One day later, the United States spacecraft Mariner 5 flew

by Venus, its radio transmission to Earth skimming the

atmosphere at progressively greater depths. The rate of

fading of the signal gave information about atmospheric

temperatures. Although there seemed to be some

discrepancies (later resolved) between the two sets of

spacecraft data, both clearly indicated that the surface of

Venus is very hot.

Since then a progression of Soviet Venera spacecraft

and one cluster of American spacecraft from the Pioneer

1 2 mission have entered the deep atmosphere or landed

on the surface and measured directly—essential y by

sticking out a thermometer—the surface and near-surface

temperatures. They turn out to be about 470°C, almost

900°F. When such factors as calibration errors of terrestrial

radio telescopes and surface emissivity are taken into

account, the old radio observations and the new direct

spacecraft measurements turn out to be in good accord.

Early Soviet landers were designed for an atmosphere

somewhat like our own. They were crushed by the high

pressures like a tin can in the grasp of a champion arm

wrestler, or a World War I submarine in the Tonga Trench.

Thereafter, Soviet Venus entry vehicles were heavily

reinforced, like modern submarines, and successful y

landed on the searing surface. When it became clear how

deep the atmosphere is and how thick the clouds, Soviet

designers became concerned that the surface might be

pitch-black. Veneras

9 a n d 10 were equipped with

floodlights. They proved unnecessary. A few percent of the

sunlight that fal s on the top of the clouds makes it through

to the surface, and Venus is about as bright as on a cloudy

day on Earth.

The resistance to the idea of a hot surface on Venus can,

I suppose, be attributed to our reluctance to abandon the

notion that the nearest planet is hospitable for life, for future

exploration, and perhaps even, in the longer term, for

human settlement. As it turns out there are no

Carboniferous swamps no global oil or seltzer oceans.

Instead, Venus is a stifling, brooding inferno. There are

some deserts, but it's mainly a world of frozen lava seas.

Our hopes are unfulfil ed. The cal of this world is now more

muted than in the early days of spacecraft exploration,

when almost anything was possible and our most romantic

notions about Venus might, for al we then knew, be

realized.

MANY SPACECRAFT CONTRIBUTED to our present understanding

of Venus. But the pioneering mission was Mariner 2.

Mariner 1 failed at launch and—as they say of a racehorse

with a broken leg—had to be destroyed. Mariner 2 worked

beautiful y and provided the key early radio data on the

climate of Venus. It made infrared observations of the

properties of the clouds. On its way from Earth to Venus, it

discovered and measured the solar wind—the stream of

charged particles that flows outward from the Sun, fil ing the

magnetospheres of any planets in its way, blowing back the

tails of comets, and establishing the distant heliopause.

Mariner 2 was the first successful planetary probe, the ship

that ushered in the age of planetary exploration.

It's stil in orbit around the Sun, every few hundred days

stil approaching, more or less tangential y, the orbit of

Venus. Each time that happens, Venus isn't there. But if we

wait long enough, Venus wil one day be nearby and

Mariner 2 will be accelerated by the planet's gravity into

some quite different orbit. Ultimately, Mariner 2, like some

planetesimal from ages past, wil be swept up by another

planet, fal into the Sun, or be ejected from the Solar

System.

Until then, this harbinger of the age of planetary

exploration, this minuscule artificial planet, wil continue

silently orbiting the Sun. It's a little as if Columbus's flagship,

t he Santa Maria, were stil making regular runs with a

ghostly crew across the Atlantic between Cadiz and

Hispaniola. In the vacuum of interplanetary space, Mariner

2 should be in mint condition for many generations.

My wish on the evening and morning star is this: that

late in the twenty-first century some great ship, on its

regular gravity-assisted transit to the outer Solar System,

intercepts this ancient derelict and heaves it aboard, so it

can be displayed in a museum of early space technology—

on Mars, perhaps, or Europa, or Iapetus.

C H A P T E R 12



THE

GROUND

MELTS

Midway between Thera and Therasia, fires

broke forth from the sea and

continued for four days, so that the whole sea

boiled and blazed, and the

fires cast up an island which was gradually

elevated as though by levers . . .

After the cessation of the eruption, the

Rhodians, at the time

of their maritime supremacy,

were first to venture upon

the scene and to erect

on the island a temple.

—STRABO,

GEOGRAPHY

(CA. 7 B.C)





Al over the Earth, you can find a kind of mountain with one

striking and unusual feature. Any child can recognize it: The

top seems sheared or squared off: If you climb to the

summit or fly over it, you discover that the mountain has a

hole or crater at its peak. In some mountains of this sort, the

craters are smal ; in others, they are almost as big as the

mountain itself. Occasional y, the craters are fil ed with

water. Sometimes they're fil ed with a more amazing liquid:

You tiptoe 10 the edge, and see vast, glowing lakes of

yel ow-red liquid and fountains of fire. These holes in the

tops of mountains are cal ed calderas, after the word

"caldron," and the mountains on which they sit are known,

of course, as volcanos—after Vulcan, the Roman god of

fire. There are perhaps 600 active volcanos discovered on

Earth. Some, beneath the oceans, are yet to be found.

A typical volcanic mountain looks safe enough. Natural

vegetation runs up its sides. Terraced fields decorate its

flanks. Hamlets and shrines nestle at its base. And yet,

without warning, after centuries of lassitude, the mountain

may explode. Barrages of boulders, torrents of ash drop

out of the sky. Rivers of molten rock come pouring down its

sides. Al over the Earth people imagined that an active

volcano was an imprisoned giant or demon struggling to

get out.

The eruptions of Mt. St. Helens and Mt. Pinatubo are

recent reminders, but examples can be found throughout

history. In 1902 a hot, glowing volcanic cloud swept down

the slopes of Mt. Pelee and kil ed 35,000 people in the city

of St. Pierre on the Caribbean island of Martinique.

Massive mudflows from the eruption of the Nevado del Ruiz

volcano in 1985 kil ed more than 25,000 Colombians. The

eruption of Mt. Vesuvius in the first century buried in ash the

hapless inhabitants of Pompeii and Herculaneum and kil ed

the intrepid naturalist Pliny the Elder as he made his way up

the side of the volcano, intent on arriving at a better

understanding of its workings. (Pliny was hardly the last:

Fifteen volcanologists have been kil ed in sundry volcanic

eruptions between 1979 and 1993.) The Mediterranean

island of Santorin (also cal ed Thera) is in reality the only

part above water of the rim of a volcano now inundated by

the sea.[††††††] The explosion of the Santorin volcano

in 1623 B.C. may, some historians think, have helped

destroy the great Minoan civilization on the nearby island of

Crete and changed the balance of power in early classical

civilization. This disaster may be the origin of the Atlantis

legend as related by Plato, in which a civilization was

destroyed "in a single day and night of misfortune." It must

have been easy back then to think that a god was angry.

Volcanos have natural y been regarded with fear and

awe. When medieval Christians viewed the eruption of Mt.

Hekla in Iceland and saw churning fragments of soft lava

suspended over the summit, they imagined they were

seeing the souls of the damned awaiting entrance to Hel .

"Fearful howlings, weeping and gnashing of teeth,"

"melancholy cries and loud wailings"

were dutiful y reported. The glowing red lakes and sulfurous

gases within the Hekla caldera were thought to be a real

glimpse into the underworld and a confirmation of folk

beliefs in Hel sand, by symmetry, in its partner, Heaven).

A volcano is, in fact, an aperture to an underground realm

much vaster than the thin surface layer that humans inhabit,

and far more hostile. The lava that erupts from a volcano is

liquid rock—rock raised to its melting point, general y

around 1000°C. The lava emerges from a hole in the Earth;

as it cools and solidifies, it generates and later remakes

the flanks of a volcanic mountain.

The most volcanical y active locales on Earth tend to be

along ridges on the ocean floor and island arcs—at the

junction of two great plates of oceanic crust—either

separating from each other, or one slipping under the other.

On the seafloor there are long zones of volcanic eruptions

—accompanied by swarms of earthquakes and plumes of

abyssal smoke and hot water—that we a are just beginning

to observe with robot and manned submersible vehicles.

Eruptions of lava must mean that the Earth's interior is

extremely hot. Indeed, seismic evidence shows that, only a

few hundred kilometers beneath the surface, nearly the

entire body of the Earth is at least slightly molten. The

interior of the Earth is hot, in part, because radioactive

elements there, such as uranium, give off heat as they

decay; and in part because the Earth retains some of the

original heat released in its formation, when many smal

worlds fel together by their mutual gravity to make the

Earth, and when iron drifted down to form our planet's core.

The molten rock, or magma, rises through fissures in the

surrounding heavier solid rocks. We can imagine vast

subterranean caverns fil ed with glowing, red, bubbling,

viscous liquids that shoot up toward the surface if a suitable

channel is by chance provided. The magma, cal ed lava as

it pours out of the summit caldera, does indeed arise from

the underworld. The souls of the damned have so far

eluded detection.

Once the volcano is ful y built from successive

outpourings, and the lava is no longer spewing up into the

caldera, then it becomes just like any other mountain—

slowly eroding because of rainfal and windblown debris

and, eventual y, the movement of continental plates across

the Earth's surface. "How many years can a mountain exist

before it is washed to the sea?" asked Bob Dylan in the

bal ad "Blowing in the Wind." The answer depends on

which planet we're talking about. For the Earth, it's typical y

about ten mil ion years. So mountains, volcanic and

about ten mil ion years. So mountains, volcanic and

otherwise, must be built on the same timescale; otherwise

the

Earth

would

be

everywhere

smooth

as

Kansas.[‡‡‡‡‡‡] Volcanic explosions can punch vast

quantities of matter—mainly fine droplets of sulfuric acid—

into the stratosphere. There, for a year or two, they reflect

sunlight back to space and cool the Earth. This happened

recently with the Philippine volcano, Mt. Pinatubo, and

disastrously in 1815-16 after the eruption of the Indonesian

volcano Mt. Tambora, which resulted in the famine-ridden

"year without a summer." A volcanic eruption in Taupo,

New Zealand, in the year 177 cooled the climate of the

Mediterranean, half a world away, and dropped fine

particles onto the Greenland ice cap. The explosion of Mt.

Mazama in Oregon (which left the caldera now cal ed

Crater Lake) in 4803 B.C. had climatic consequences

throughout the northern hemisphere. Studies of volcanic

effects on the climate were on the investigative path that

eventual y led to the discovery of nuclear winter. They

provide important tests of our use of computer models to

predict future climate change. Volcanic particles injected

into the upper air are also an additional cause of thinning of

the ozone layer.

So a large volcanic explosion in some unfrequented and

obscure part of the world can alter the environment on a

global scale. Both in their origins and in their effects,

volcanos remind us of how vulnerable we are to minor

burps and sneezes in the Earth's internal metabolism, and

how important it is for us to understand how this

subterranean heat engine works.

IN THE FINAL STAGES of formation of the Earth—as wel as the

Moon, Mars, and Venus— impacts by smal worlds are

thought to have generated global magma oceans. Molten

rock flooded the pre-existing topography. Great floods, tidal

waves kilometers high, of flowing, red-hot liquid magma

wel ed up from the interior and poured over the surface of

the planet, burying everything in their path: mountains,

channels, craters, perhaps even the last evidence of much

earlier, more clement times. The geological odometer was

reset. Al accessible records of surface geology begin with

the last global magma flood. Before the, cool and solidify,

oceans of lava may be hundreds or even thousands of

kilometers thick. In our time, bil ions of years later, the

surface of such a world may be quiet, inactive, with no hint

of current vulcanism. Or there may be—as on Earth—a few

smal -scale but active reminders of an epoch when the

entire surface was flooded with liquid rock.

In the early days of planetary geology, ground-based

telescopic observations were al the data we had. A fervent

debate had been running for half a century on whether the

craters of the Moon were due to impacts or volcanos. A few

low mounds with summit calderas were found—almost

certainly lunar volcanos. But the big craters—bowl or pan-

shaped and sitting on the flat ground and not the tops of

mountains—were a different story. Some geologists saw in

them similarities with certain highly eroded volcanos on

Earth. Others did not. The best counter-argument was that

we know there are asteroids and comets that fly past the

Moon; they must hit it sometimes; and the col isions must

make craters. Over the history of the Moon a large number

of such craters should have been punched out. So if the

craters we see are not due to impacts, where then are the

impact craters? We now know from direct laboratory

examination of lunar craters that they are almost entirely of

impact origin. But 4 bil ion years ago this little world, nearly

dead today, was bubbling and churning away, driven by

primeval vulcanism from sources of internal heat now long

gone.

In November 1971, NASA's Mariner 9 spacecraft arrived

at Mars to find the planet completely obscured by a global

dust storm. Almost the only features to be seen were four

circular spots rising out of the reddish murk. But there was

something peculiar about them: They had holes in their

tops. As the storm

cleared, we were able to see unmistakably that we had

been viewing four huge volcanic mountains penetrating

through the dust cloud, each capped by a great summit

caldera.

After the storm dissipated, the true scale of these

volcanos became clear. The largest—appropriately named

Olympus Mons, or Mt. Olympus, after the home of the

Greek gods—is more than 25 kilometers (roughly 15 miles)

high, dwarfing not only the largest volcano on Earth but also

the largest mountain of any sort, Mt. Everest, which stands

9 kilometers above the Tibetan plateau. There are some 20

large volcanos on Mars, but none so massive as Olympus

Mons, which has a volume about 100 times that of the

largest volcano on Earth, Mauna Loa in Hawaii.

By counting the accumulated impact craters (made by

smal impacting asteroids, and readily distinguished from

summit calderas) on the flanks of the volcanos, estimates

of their ages can be derived. Some Martian volcanos turn

out to be a few bil ion years old, although none dates back

to the very origin of Mars, about 4.5 bil ion years ago.

Some, including Olympus Mons, are comparatively new—

perhaps only a few hundred mil ion years old. It is clear that

enormous volcanic explosions occurred early in Martian

history, perhaps providing an atmosphere much denser

than the one Mars holds today. What would the place have

looked like if we had visited it then?

Some volcanic flows on Mars (for example, in Cerberus)

formed as recently as 200 mil ion years ago. It is, I

suppose, even possible—although there is no evidence

either way—that Olympus Mons, the largest volcano we

know about for certain in the Solar System, wil be active

again. Volcanologists, a patient sort, would doubtless

welcome the event.

In 1990-93 the Magellan spacecraft returned surprising

radar data about the landforms of Venus. Cartographers

prepared maps of almost the entire planet, with fine detail

down to about 100 meters, the goal-line-to-goal-line

distance in an American footbal stadium. More data were

radioed home by Magellan than by al other planetary

missions combined. Since much of the ocean floor remains

unexplored (except perhaps for stil -classified data

acquired by the U.S. and Soviet navies), we may know

more about the surface topography of Venus than about

any other planet, Earth included. Much of the geology of

Venus is unlike anything seen on Earth or anywhere else.

Planetary geologists have given these landforms names,

but that doesn't mean we ful y understand how they're

formed.

Because the surface temperature of Venus is almost

470°C (900°F), the rocks there are much closer to their

melting points than are those at the surface of the Earth.

Rocks begin to soften and flow at much shal ower depths

on Venus than on Earth. This is very likely the reason that

many geological features on Venus seem to be plastic and

deformed.

The planet is covered by volcanic plains and highland

plateaus. The geological constructs include volcanic cones,

probable shield volcanos, and calderas. There are many

places where we can see that lava has erupted in vast

floods. Some plains features ranging to over 200

kilometers in size are playful y cal ed "ticks" and

"arachnoids" (which translates roughly as "spiderlike

things")—because

they

are

circular

depressions

surrounded by concentric rings, while long, spindly surface

cracks extend radial y out from the center. Odd, flat

"pancake domes"—a geological feature unknown on Earth,

but probably a kind of volcano—are perhaps formed by

thick, viscous lava slowly flowing uniformly in al directions.

There are many examples of more irregular lava flows.

Curious ring structures cal ed "coronae" range up to some

2,000 kilometers across. The distinctive lava flows on

stifling hot Venus offer up a rich menu of geological

mysteries.

The most unexpected and peculiar features are the

sinuous channels—with meanders and oxbows, looking just

like river val eys on Earth. The longest are longer than the

greatest rivers on Earth. But it is much too hot for liquid

water on Venus. And we can tel from the absence of smal

impact craters that the atmosphere has been this thick,

driving as great a greenhouse effect, for as long as the

present surface has been in existence. (If it had been much

thinner, intermediate-sized asteroids would not have

burned up on entry into the atmosphere, but would have

survived to excavate craters as they impact this planet's

surface.) Lava flowing downhil does make sinuous

channels (sometimes under the ground, fol owed by

col apse of the roof of the channel). But even at the

temperatures of Venus, the lavas radiate heat, cool, slow,

congeal, and stop. The magma freezes solid. Lava

channels cannot go even 10 percent of the length of the

long Venus channels before they solidify. Some planetary

geologists think there must be a special thin, watery,

inviscid lava generated on Venus. But this is a speculation

supported by no other data, and a confession of our

ignorance.

The thick atmosphere moves sluggishly; because it's so

dense, though, it's very good at lifting and moving fine

particles. There are wind streaks on Venus, largely

emanating from impact craters, in which the prevailing

winds have scoured piles of sand and dust and provided a

sort of weather vane imprinted on the surface. Here and

there we seem to see fields of sand dunes, and provinces

where wind erosion has sculpted volcanic landforms. These

aeolian processes take place in slow motion, as if at the

bottom of the sea. The winds are feeble at the surface of

Venus. It may take only a soft gust to raise a cloud of fine

particles, but in that stifling inferno a gust is hard to come

by.

There are many impact craters on Venus, but nothing like

the number on the Moon or Mars. Craters smal er than a

few across are oddly missing. The reason is understood:

Smal asteroids and comets are broken up on entry into the

dense Venus atmosphere before they can hit the surface.

The observed cutoff in crater size corresponds very wel to

the present density of the atmosphere of Venus. Certain

irregular splotches seen on the Magellan images are

thought to be the remains of impactors that broke up in the

thick air before they could gouge out a crater.

Most of the impact craters are remarkably pristine and

wel preserved; only a few percent of them have been

engulfed by subsequent lava flows. The surface of Venus

as revealed by Magellan is very young. There are so few

impact craters that everything older than about 500 mil ion

years[§§§§§§] must have been eradicated—on a planet

almost certainly 4.5 bil ion years old. There is only one

plausible erosive agent adequate for what we see:

vulcanism. Al over the planet craters, mountains, and other

geological features have been inundated by seas of lava

that once wel ed up from the inside, flowed far, and froze.

After examining so young a surface covered with

congealed magma, you might wonder if there are any

active volcanos left. None has been found for certain, but

there are a few—for example, one cal ed Maat Mons—that

appear to be surrounded by fresh lava and which may

indeed stil be churning and belching. There is some

evidence that the abundance of sulfur compounds in the

high atmosphere varies with time, as if volcanos at the

surface were episodical y injecting these materials into the

atmosphere. When the volcanos are quiescent, the sulfur

compounds simply fal out of the air. There's also disputed

evidence of lightning playing around the mountaintops of

Venus, as sometimes happens on active volcanos on

Earth. But we do not know for certain whether there is

ongoing vulcanism on Venus. That's a matter for future

missions.

Some scientists believe that until about 500 mil ion years

ago the Venus surface was almost entirely devoid of

landforms. Streams and oceans of molten rock were

relentlessly pouring out of the interior, fil ing in and covering

over any relief that had managed to form. Had you

plummeted down through the clouds in that long-ago time,

the surface would have been nearly uniform and

featureless. At night the landscape would have been

hel ishly glowing from the red heat of molten lava. In this

view, the great internal heat engine of Venus, which

supplied copious amounts of magma to the surface until

about 500 mil ion years ago, has now turned off. The

planetary heat engine has final y run down.

In another provocative theoretical model, this one by the

geophysicist Donald Turcotte, Venus has plate tectonics

like the Earth's but it turns off and on. Right now, he

proposes, the plate tectonics are off; "continents" do not

move along the surface, do not crash into one another, do

not thereby raise mountain ranges, and are not later

subducted into the deep interior. After hundreds of mil ions

of years of quiescence, though, plate tectonics always

breaks out and surface features are flooded by lava,

destroyed by mountain building, subducted, and otherwise

obliterated. The last such breakout ended about 500 mil ion

years ago, Turcotte suggests, and everything has been

quiet since. However, the presence of coronae may signify

—on timescales that are geological y in the near future—

that massive changes on the surface of Venus are about to

break out again.

EVEN MORE UNEXPECTED than the great Martian volcanos or the

magma-flooded surface of Venus is what awaited us when

the Voyager 1 spacecraft encountered lo, the innermost of

the four

large Galilean moons of Jupiter, in March 1979. There we

found a strange, smal , multihued world positively awash in

volcanos. As we watched in astonishment, eight active

plumes poured gas and fine particles up into the sky. The

largest, now cal ed Pele—after the Hawaiian volcano

goddess—projected a fountain of material 250 kilometers

into space, higher above the surface of Io than some

astronauts have ventured above the Earth. By the time

Voyager 2 arrived at Io, four months later, Pele had turned

itself off, although six of the other plumes were stil active, at

least one new plume had been discovered, and another

caldera, named Surt, had changed its color

dramatical y.

The colors of Io, even though exaggerated in NASA's

color-enhanced images, are like none elsewhere in the

Solar System. The currently favored explanation is that the

Ionian volcanos are driven not by upwel ing molten rock, as

on the Earth, the Moon, Venus, and Mars, but by upwel ing

sulfur dioxide and molten sulfur. The surface is covered with

volcanic mountains, volcanic calderas, vents, and lakes of

molten sulfur. Various forms and compounds of sulfur have

been detected on the surface of Io and in nearby space—

the volcanos blow some of the sulfur off Io

altogether.[*******] These findings have suggested to

some an underground sea of liquid sulfur that issues to the

surface at points of weakness, generates a shal ow

volcanic mound, trickles downhil , and freezes, its final color

determined by its temperature on eruption.

On the Moon or Mars, you can find many places that have

changed little in a bil ion years. On Io, in a century, much of

the surface should be reflooded, fil ed in or washed away

by new volcanic flows. Maps of Io wil then quickly become

obsolete, and cartography of Io wil have become a growth

industry.

Al this seems to fol ow readily enough from the Voyager

observations. The rate at which the surface is covered over

by current volcanic flows implies massive changes in 50 or

100 years, a prediction that luckily can be tested. The

Voyager images of to can be compared with much poorer

images taken by ground-based telescopes 50 years

earlier, and by the Hubble Space Telescope 13 years later.

The surprising conclusion seems to be that the big surface

markings on Io have hardly changed at al . Clearly, we're

missing something.

A VOLCANO in one sense represents the insides of a planet

gushing out, a wound that eventual y heals itself by cooling,

only to be replaced by new stigmata. Different worlds have

different insides. The discovery of liquid-sulfur vulcanism on

different insides. The discovery of liquid-sulfur vulcanism on

Io was a little like finding that an old acquaintance, when

cut, bleeds green. You had no idea such differences were

possible. He seemed so ordinary.

We are natural y eager to find additional signs of

vulcanism on other worlds. On Europa, the second of the

Galilean moons of Jupiter and Io's neighbor, there are no

volcanic mountains at al ; but molten ice—liquid water—

seems to have gushed to the surface through an enormous

number of crisscrossing dark markings before freezing.

And further out, among the moons of Saturn, there are

signs that liquid water has gushed up from the interior and

wiped away impact craters. Stil , we have never seen

anything that might plausibly be an ice volcano in either the

Jupiter or Saturn systems. On Triton, we may have

observed nitrogen or methane vulcanism.

The volcanos of other worlds provide a stirring spectacle.

They enhance our sense of wonder, our joy in the beauty

and diversity of the Cosmos. But these exotic volcanos

perform another service as wel : They help us to know the

volcanos of our own world—and perhaps wil help one day

even to predict their eruptions. If we cannot understand

what's happening in other circumstances, where the

physical parameters are different, how deep can our

understanding be of the circumstance of most concern to

us? A general theory of vulcanism must cover al cases.

When we stumble upon vast volcanic eminences on a

geological y quiet Mars; when we discover the surface of

Venus wiped clean only yesterday by floods of magma;

when we find a world melted not by the heat of radioactive

decay, as on Earth, but by gravitational tides exerted by

nearby worlds; when we observe sulfur rather than silicate

vulcanism; and when we begin to wonder, in the moons of

the outer planets, whether we might be viewing water,

ammonia, nitrogen, or methane vulcanism—then we are

learning what else is possible.

C H A P T E R 13

THE GIFT

OF

APOLLO

The gates of

Heaven

are

open wide;

Off I ride . . .

—CH'U

TZ'U /ATTRIBUTED TO CH'U YUAN),

"THE NINE SONGS," SONG V,

"THE GREAT LORD OF LIVES"

(CHINA,

CA. THIRD

CENTURY

B.C.)

It's a sultry night in July. You've falen asleep in the

armchair. Abruptly, you startle awake, disoriented. The

television set is on, but not the sound. You strain to

understand what you're seeing. Two ghostly white figures in

coveral s and helmets are softly dancing under a pitch-

black sky. They make strange little skipping motions, which

propel them upward amid barely perceptible clouds of dust.

But something is wrong. They take too long to come down.

Encumbered as they are, they seem to be flying a little. You

rub your eyes, but the dreamlike tableau persists.

Of al the events surrounding Apollo 11's landing on the

Moon on July 20, 1969, my most vivid recol ection is its

unreal quality. Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin shuffled

along the gray, dusty lunar surface, the Earth looming large

in their sky, while Michael Col ins, now the Moon's own

moon, orbited above them in lonely vigil. Yes, it was an

astonishing technological achievement and a triumph for

the United States. Yes, the astronauts displayed death-

defying courage. Yes, as Armstrong said as he first

alighted, this was a historic step for the human species. But

if you turned off the by-play between Mission Control and

the Sea of Tranquility, with its deliberately mundane and

routine chatter, and stared into that black-and-white

television monitor, you could glimpse that we humans had

entered the realm of myth and legend.

We knew the Moon from our earliest days. It was there

when our ancestors descended from the trees into the

savannahs, when we learned to walk upright, when we first

devised stone tools, when we domesticated fire, when we

invented agriculture and built cities and set out to subdue

the Earth. Folklore and popular songs celebrate a

mysterious connection between the Moon and love. The

word "month" and the second day of the week are both

named after the Moon. Its waxing and waning—from

crescent to ful to crescent to new—was widely understood

as a celestial metaphor of death and rebirth. It was

connected with the ovulation cycle of women, which has

nearly the same period—as the word "menstruation" (Latin

mensis = month, from the word "to measure") reminds us.

Those who sleep in moonlight go mad; the connection is

preserved in the English word "lunatic." In the old Persian

story, a vizier renowned for his wisdom is asked which is

more useful, the Sun or the Moon. "The Moon," he answers,

"because the Sun shines in daytime when it's light out

anyway." Especial y when we lived out-of-doors, it was a

major—if oddly intangible—presence in our lives.

The Moon was a metaphor for the unattainable: "You

plight as wel ask for the Moon," they used to say. Or "You

can no more do that than fly to the Moon." For most of our

history, eve had no idea what it was. A spirit? A god? A

thing? It didn't look like something big far away, but more

like something smal nearby—something the size of a plate,

maybe, hanging in the sky a little above our heads. Ancient

Greek philosophers debated the proposition "that the Moon

is exactly as large as it looks" (betraying a hopeless

confusion between linear and angular size). Walking on the

Moon would have seemed a screwbal idea; it made more

sense to imagine somehow climbing up into the sky on a

ladder or on the back of a giant bird, grabbing the Moon,

and bringing it down to Earth. Nobody ever succeeded,

although there were myths aplenty about heroes who had

tried.

Not until a few centuries ago did the idea of the Moon as

a place, a quarter-mil ion miles away, gain wide currency.

And in that brief flicker of time, we've gone from the earliest

steps in understanding the Moon's nature to walking and

joy-riding on its surface. We calculated how objects move

in space; liquefied oxygen from the air; invented big

rockets, telemetry, reliable electronics, inertial guidance,

and much else. Then we sailed out into the sky.

I was lucky enough to be involved in the Apollo program,

but I don't blame people who think the whole thing was

faked in a Hol ywood movie studio. In the late Roman

Empire, pagan philosophers had attacked Christian

doctrine on the ascension to Heaven of the body of Christ

and on the promised bodily resurrection of the dead—

because the force of gravity pul s down al "earthly bodies."

St. Augustine rejoined: "If human skil can by some

contrivance fabricate vessels that float, out of metals which

sink. . . how much more credible is it that God, by some

hidden mode of operation, should even more certainly

effect that these earthly masses be emancipated" from the

chains that bind them to Earth? That humans should one

day discover such a "mode of operation" was beyond

imagining. Fifteen hundred years later, we emancipated

ourselves.

The achievement elicited an amalgam of awe and

concern. Some remembered the story of the Tower of

Babel. Some, orthodox Moslems among them, felt setting

foot on the Moon's surface to be impudence and sacrilege.

Many greeted it as a turning point in history.

The Moon is no longer unattainable. A dozen humans, al

Americans, have made those odd bounding motions they

cal ed "moonwalks" on the crunchy, cratered, ancient gray

lava—beginning on that July day in 1969. But since 1972,

no one from any nation has ventured back. Indeed, none of



us has gone anywhere since the glory days of Apollo

except into low Earth orbit—like a toddler who takes a few

tentative steps outward and then, breathless, retreats to the

safety of his mother's skirts.

Once upon a time, we soared into the Solar System. For

a few years. Then we hurried back. Why? What happened?

What was Apollo real y about?

The scope and audacity of John Kennedy's May 25,

1961 message to a joint session of Congress on "Urgent

National Needs"—the speech that launched the Apol o

program—dazzled me. We would use rockets not yet

designed and al oys not yet conceived, navigation and

docking schemes not yet devised, in order to send a man

to an unknown world—a world not yet explored, not even in

a preliminary way, not even by robots—and we would bring

him safely back, and we would do it before the decade was

over. This confident pronouncement was made before any

American had even achieved Earth orbit.

As a newly minted Ph.D., I actual y thought al this had

something central y to do with science. But the President

did not talk about discovering the origin of the Moon, or

even about bringing samples of it back for study. Al he

seemed to be interested in was sending someone there

and bringing him home. It was a kind of gesture. Kennedy's

science advisor, Jerome Wiesner, later told me he had

made a deal with the President: If Kennedy would not claim

that Apol o was about science, then he. Wiesner, would

support it. So if not science, what?

The Apol o program is real y about politics, others told

me. This sounded more promising. Nonaligned nations

would be tempted to drift toward the Soviet Union if it was

ahead in space exploration, if the United States showed

insufficient "national vigor." I didn't fol ow. Here was the

United States, ahead of the Soviet Union in virtual y every

area of technology—the world's economic, military, and, on

occasion, even moral leader—and Indonesia would go

Communist because Yuri Gagarin beat John Glenn to Earth

orbit? What's so special about space technology?

Suddenly I understood.

Sending people to orbit the Earth or robots to orbit the

Sun requires rockets—big, reliable, powerful rockets.

Those same rockets can be used for nuclear war. The

same technology that transports a man to the Moon can

carry nuclear warheads halfway around the world. The

same technology that puts an astronomer and a telescope

in Earth orbit can also put up a laser "battle station." Even

back then, there was fanciful talk in military circles, East

and West, about space as the new "high ground," about the

nation that "control ed" space "control ing" the Earth. Of

course strategic rockets were already being tested on

Earth. But heaving a bal istic missile with a dummy

warhead into a target zone in the middle of the Pacific

Ocean doesn't buy much glory. Sending people into space

captures the attention and Imagination of the world.

You wouldn't spend the money to launch astronauts for

this reason alone, but of al the ways of demonstrating

rocket potency, this one works best. It was a rite of national

manhood; the shape of the boosters made this point readily

understood without anyone actual y having to explain it. The

communication

seemed

to

be

transmitted

from

unconscious mind to unconscious mind without the higher

mental faculties catching a whiff of what was going on.

My col eagues today—struggling for every space science

dol ar—may have forgotten how easy it was to get money

for "space" in the glory days of Apol o and just before. Of

many examples, consider this exchange before the

Defense Appropriations Subcommittee of the House of

Representatives in 1958, only a few months after Sputnik

1. Air Force Assistant Secretary Richard E. Horner is

testifying; his interlocutor is Rep. Daniel J. Flood

(Democrat of Pennsylvania):

HORNER: [W]hy is it desirable from the military

point of view to have a man on the moon? Partly,

from the classic point of view, because it is there.

Partly because we might be afraid that the

U.S.S.R. might get one there first and realize

advantages which we had not anticipated existed

there . . .

FLOOD: [I]f we gave you al the money you said was

necessary, regardless of how much it was, can

you in the Air Force hit the moon with something,

anything, before Christmas?

HORNER: I feel sure we can. There is always a

certain amount of risk in this kind of undertaking,

but we feel that we can do that; yes, sir.

FLOOD: Have you asked anybody in the Air Force

or the Department of Defense to give you enough

money,

hardware, and people, starting at midnight

tonight, to chip a. piece out of that bal of

green cheese for a Christmas present to

Uncle Sam? Have you asked for that?

HORNER: We have submitted such a program to

We have submitted such a program to

the Office of the Secretary of Defense. It is

currently under consideration.

FLOOD: I am for giving it to them as of this minute,

Mr. Chairman, with our supplemental, without

waiting for somebody downtown to make up his

mind to ask for it. If this man means what he says

and if he knows what he is talking about—and I

think he does—then this committee should not

wait five minutes more today. We should give him

al the money and al the hardware and al the

people he wants, regardless of what anybody else

says or wants, and tel him to go up on top of

some hil and do it without any question.

When President Kennedy formulated the Apol o

program, the Defense Department had a slew of space

projects under development—ways of carrying military

personnel up into space, means of conveying them around

the Earth, robot weapons on orbiting platforms intended to

shoot down satel ites and bal istic missiles of other nations.

Apollo supplanted these programs. They never reached

operational status. A case can be made then that Apol o

served another purpose—to move the U.S.—Soviet space

competition from a military to a civilian arena. There are

some who believe that Kennedy intended Apollo as a

substitute for an anus race in space. Maybe.

For me, the most ironic token of that moment in history is

the plaque signed by President Richard M. Nixon that

Apollo 11 took to the Moon. It reads: "We came in peace

for al mankind." As the United States was dropping 7½

megatons of conventional explosives on smal nations in

Southeast Asia, we congratulated ourselves on our

humanity: We would harm no one on a lifeless rock. That

plaque is there stil , attached to the base of the Apol o 11

Lunar Module, on the airless desolation of the Sea of

Tranquility. If no one disturbs it, it wil stil be readable a

mil ion years from now.

Six more missions fol owed Apollo 11, al but one of

which successful y landed on the lunar surface. Apol o 17

was the first to carry a scientist. As soon as he got there,

the program was canceled. The first scientist and the last

human to land on the Moon were the same person. The

program had already served its purpose that July night in

1969. The half-dozen subsequent missions were just

momentum.

Apollo was not mainly about science. It was not even

mainly

about

space. Apollo was about ideological

confrontation and nuclear war—often described by such

euphemisms as world "leadership" and national "prestige."

Nevertheless, good space science was done. We now

know much more about the composition, age, and history

of the Moon and the origin of the lunar landforms. We have

made progress in understanding where the Moon came

from. Some of us have used lunar cratering statistics to

better understand the Earth at the time of the origin of life.

But more important than any of this, Apollo provided an

aegis, an umbrel a under which bril iantly engineered robot

spacecraft were dispatched throughout the Solar System,

making that preliminary reconnaissance of dozens of

worlds. The offspring of Apollo have now reached the

planetary frontiers.

If not for Apollo—and, therefore, if not for the political

purpose it served—I doubt whether the historic American

expeditions of exploration and discovery throughout the

Solar System would have occurred, The Mariners, Vikings,

Pioneers, Voyagers , a nd Galileo are among the gifts of

A p o l l o . M a g e l l a n a n d C a s s i n i are more distant

descendants. Something similar is true for the pioneering

Soviet efforts in Solar System exploration, including the first

soft landings of robot spacecraft —Luna 9, Mars 3, Venera

8- on other worlds.

Apollo conveyed a confidence, energy, and breadth of

vision that did capture the imagination of the world. That too

was part of its purpose. It inspired an optimism about

technology, an enthusiasm for the future. If we could fly to

the Moon, as so many have asked, what else were we

capable of? Even those who opposed the policies and

actions of the United States—even those who thought the

worst of us—acknowledged the genius and heroism of the

Apollo program. With Apollo, the United States touched

greatness.

When you pack your bags for a big trip, you never know

what's in store for you. The Apollo astronauts on their way

to and from the Moon photographed their home planet. It

was a natural thing to do, but it had consequences that few

foresaw. For the first time, the inhabitants of Earth could

see their world from above—the whole Earth, the Earth in

color, the Earth as an exquisite spinning white and blue bal

set against the vast darkness of space. Those images

helped awaken our slumbering planetary consciousness.

They provide incontestable evidence that we al share the

same vulnerable planet. They remind us of what is

important and what is not. They were the harbingers of

Voyager's pale blue dot.

We may have found that perspective just in time, just as

our technology threatens the habitability of our world.

Whatever the reason we first mustered the Apollo program,

however mired it was in Cold War nationalism and the

instruments of death, the inescapable recognition of the

unity and fragility of the Earth is its clear and luminous

dividend, the unexpected final gift of Apollo. What began in

deadly competition has helped us to see that global

cooperation is the essential precondition for of survival.

Travel is broadening.

It's time to hit the road again.



C H A

P T E R 14

EXPLORING

OTHER

WORLDS

AND

PROTECTING

THIS

ONE

The planets, in their various stages

of development, are subjected to the same

formative forces that operate on our

earth, and have, therefore, the same

geologic formation, and probably life, of

our own past, and perhaps future; but.

further than this, these forces are acting,

in some cases, under totally different

conditions from those under which

they operate on the earth, and hence

must evolve forms different from those

ever known to man. The value of such

material as this to the comparative

sciences is too obvious to need discussion.

—ROBERT

H.

GODDARD, NOTEBOOK

(1907)

For the first time in

my life, I saw the horizon as a curved line.

It was accentuated by a thin

seam of dark blue light-our atmosphere.

Obviously, this was not the

"ocean" of air I had been told it was

so many times in my life. I

was terrified by its fragile appearance.

—ULF MERBOLD,

GERMAN SPACE SHUTTLE ASTRONAUT (1988)

When you look down at the Earth from orbital altitudes,

you see a lovely, fragile world embedded in black vacuum.

But peering at a piece of the Earth through a spacecraft

porthole is nothing like the joy of seeing it entire against the

backdrop of black, or—better—sweeping across your field

of view as you float in space unencumbered by a

spacecraft. The first human to have this experience was

Alexei Leonov, who on March 18, 1965, left Voskhod 2 in

the original space "walk": "I looked down at the Earth," he

recal s, "and the first thought that crossed my mind was

`The world is round, after al .' In one glance I could see from

Gibraltar to the Caspian Sea . . . I felt like a bird—with

wings, and able to fly."

When you view the Earth from farther away, as the Apol o

astronauts did, it shrinks in apparent size, until nothing but a

little geography remains. You're struck by how self-

contained it is. An occasional hydrogen atom leaves; a

pitter-patter of cometary dust arrives. Sunlight, generated in

the immense, silent thermonuclear engine deep in the solar

interior, pours out of the Sun in al directions, and the Earth

intercepts enough of it to provide a little il umination and

enough heat for our modest purposes. Apart from that, this

smal world is on its own.

From the surface of the Moon you can see it, perhaps as

a crescent, even its continents now indistinct. And from the

vantage point of the outermost planet it is a mere point of

pale light.

From Earth orbit, you are struck by the tender blue arc of

the horizon—the Earth's thin atmosphere seen tangential y.

You can understand why there is no longer such a thing as

a local environmental problem. Molecules are stupid.

Industrial poisons, greenhouse gases, and substances that

attack the protective ozone layer, because of their abysmal

ignorance, do not respect borders. They are oblivious of

the notion of national sovereignty. And so, due to the almost

mythic powers of our technology (and the prevalence of

short-term thinking), we are beginning—on Continental and

on planetary scales—to pose a danger to ourselves.

Plainly, if these problems are to be solved, it wil require

many nations acting in concert over many years.

many nations acting in concert over many years.

I'm struck again by the irony that spaceflight—conceived

in tile cauldron of nationalist rivalries and hatreds—brings

with it a stunning transnational vision. You spend even a

little time contemplating the Earth from orbit and the most

deeply engrained nationalisms begin to erode. They seem

the squabbles of mites on a plum.

If we're stuck on one world, we're limited to a single case;

we don't know what else is possible. Then—like an art

fancier familiar only with Fayoum tomb paintings, a dentist

who knows only molars, a philosopher trained merely in

NeoPlatonism, a linguist who has studied only Chinese, or

a physicist whose knowledge of gravity is restricted to

fal ing bodies on Earth—our perspective is foreshortened,

our insights narrow, our predictive abilities circumscribed.

By contrast, when we explore other worlds, what once

seemed the only way a planet could be turns out to be

somewhere in the middle range of a vast spectrum of

possibilities. When we look at those other worlds, we begin

to understand what happens when we have too much of

one thing or too little of another. We learn how a planet can

go wrong. We gain a new understanding, foreseen by the

spaceflight pioneer Robert Goddard, cal ed comparative

planetology.

The exploration of other worlds has opened our eyes in

the study of volcanos, earthquakes, and weather. It may one

day have profound implications for biology, because al life

on Earth is built on a common biochemical master plan.

The discovery of a single extraterrestrial organism—even

something as humble as a bacterium—would revolutionize

our understanding of living things. But the connection

between exploring other worlds and protecting this one is

most evident in the study of Earth's climate and the

burgeoning threat to that climate that our technology poses.

Other worlds provide vital insights about what dumb things

not to do on Earth.

Three

potential

environmental

catastrophes—al

operating on a global scale—have recently been

uncovered: ozone layer depletion, greenhouse warming,

and nuclear winter. Al three discoveries, it turns out, have

strong ties to the exploration of the planets.

(1) It was disturbing to find that an inert material with al

sorts of practical applications—it serves as the working

fluid in refrigerators and air conditioners, as aerosol

propel ant for deodorants and other products, as lightweight

foamy packaging for fast foods, and as a cleaning agent in

microelectronics, to name only a few-can pose a danger to

life on Earth. Who would have figured?

The molecules in question are cal ed chlorofluorocarbons

(CFCs). Chemical y, they're extremely inert, which means

they're invulnerable—until they find themselves up in the

ozone layer, where they're broken apart by ultraviolet light

from the Sun. The chlorine atoms thus liberated attack and

break down the protective ozone, letting more ultraviolet

light reach the ground. This increased ultraviolet intensity

ushers in a ghastly procession of potential consequences

involving not just skin cancer and cataracts, but weakening

of the human immune system and, most dangerous of al ,

possible harm to agriculture and to photosynthetic

organisms at the base of the food chain on which most life

on Earth depends.

Who discovered that CFCs posed a threat to the ozone

layer? Was it the principal manufacturer, the DuPont

Corporation, exercising corporate responsibility? Was it

the Environmental Protection Agency protecting us? Was it

the Department of Defense defending us? No, it was two

Ivory-tower, white-coated university scientists working on

something else—Sherwood Rowland and Mario Molina of

the University of California, Irvine. Not even an Ivy League

university. No one instructed them to look for dangers to the

environment. They were pursuing fundamental research.

They were scientists fol owing their own interests. Their

names should be known to every schoolchild.

In their original calculations, Rowland and Molina used

rate constants of chemical reactions involving chlorine and

other halogens that had been measured in part with NASA

support. Why NASA? Because Venus has chlorine and

fluorine molecules in its atmosphere, and planetary

aeronomers had wanted to understand what's happening

there.

Confirming theoretical work on the role of CFCs in ozone

depletion was soon done by a group led by Michael

McElroy at Harvard How is it they had al these branching

networks of halogen chemical kinetics in their computer

ready to go? Because they were working on the chlorine

and fluorine chemistry of the atmosphere of Venus. Venus

helped make and helped confirm the discovery that the

Earth's ozone layer is in danger. An entirely unexpected

connection

was

found

between

the

atmospheric

photochemistries of the two planets. A result of importance

to everyone on Earth emerged from what might wel have

seemed the most blue-sky, abstract, impractical kind of

work, understanding the chemistry of minor constituents in

the upper atmosphere of another world.

There's also a Mars connection. With Viking we found

the surface of Mars to be apparently lifeless and

remarkably deficient even in simple organic molecules. But

simple organic molecules ought to be there, because of the

impact of organic-rich meteorites from the nearby asteroid

belt. This deficiency is widely attributed to the lack of ozone

on Mars. The Viking microbiology experiments found that

organic matter carried from Earth to Mars and sprinkled on

Martian surface dust is quickly oxidized arid destroyed. The

materials in the dust that do the destruction are molecules

something like hydrogen peroxide—which we use as an

antiseptic because it kil s microbes by oxidizing there,

Ultraviolet light from the Sun strikes the surface of Mars

unimpeded by an ozone layer; if any organic matter were

there, it would be quickly destroyed by the ultraviolet light

itself and its oxidation products. Thus part of the reason the

topmost layers of Martian soil are antiseptic is that Mars

has an ozone hole of planetary dimensions—by itself a

useful cautionary tale for us, who are busily thinning and

puncturing our ozone layer.

(2) Global warming is predicted to fol ow from the

increasing greenhouse effect caused largely by carbon

dioxide generated in the burning of fossil fuels—but also

from the buildup of other infrared-absorbing gases (oxides

of nitrogen, methane, those same CFCs, and other

molecules).

Suppose that we have a three-dimensional general

circulation computer model of the Earth's climate. Its

programmers claim it's able to predict what the Earth wil

be like if there's more of one atmospheric constituent or

less of another. The model does very wel at "predicting"

the present climate. But there is a nagging worry: The

model has been "tuned" so it wil come out right—that is,

certain adjustable parameters are chosen, not from first

principles of physics, but to get the right answer. This is not

exactly cheating, but if we apply the same computer model

to rather different climatic regimes—deep global warming,

for instance—the tuning might then be inappropriate. The

model might be valid for today's climate, but not

extrapolatable to others.

One way to test this program is to apply it to the very

different climates of other planets. Can it predict the

structure of the atmosphere on Mars and the climate there?

The weather? What about Venus? If it were to fail these test

cases, we would be right in mistrusting it when it makes

predictions for our own planet. In fact, climate models now

in use do very wel in predicting from first principles of

physics the climates on Venus and Mars.

On Earth, huge upwel ings of molten lava are known and

attributed to superplumes convecting up from the deep

mantle and generating vast plateaus of frozen basalt. A

spectacular example occurred about a hundred mil ion

years ago, and added perhaps ten times the present

carbon dioxide content to the atmosphere, inducing

substantial global warming. These plumes, it is thought,

occur episodical y throughout Earth's history. Similar mantle

upwel ing seem to have occurred on Mars and Venus.

There are sound practical reasons for us to want to

understand how a major change to the Earth's surface and

climate could suddenly arrive unannounced from hundreds

of kilometers beneath our feet.

Some of the most important recent work on global

warming has been done by James Hansen and his

col eagues at the Goddard Institute for Space Sciences, a

NASA facility in New York City. Hansen developed one of

the major computer climate models and employed it to

predict what wil happen to our climate as the greenhouse

gases continue to build up. He has been in the forefront of

testing these models against ancient climates of the Earth.

(During the last ice ages, it is of interest to note, more

carbon dioxide and methane are strikingly correlated with

higher temperatures.) Hansen col ected a wide range of

weather data from this century and last, to see what actual y

happened to the global temperature, and then compared it

to the computer model's predictions of what should have

happened. The two agree to within the errors of

measurement

and

calculation,

respectively.

He

courageously testified before Congress in the face of a

political y generated order from the White House Office of

Management and Budget (this was in the Reagan years) to

exaggerate the uncertainties and minimize the dangers.

His calculation on the explosion of the Philippine volcano

Mt. Pinatubo and his prediction of the resulting temporary

decline in the Earth's temperature (about half a degree

Celsius) were right on the money. He has been a force in

convincing governments worldwide that global warming is

something to be taken seriously.

How did Hansen get interested in the greenhouse effect

in the first place? His doctoral thesis (at the University of

Iowa in 1967) was about Venus. He agreed that the high

radio brightness of Venus is due to a very hot surface,

agreed that greenhouse gases keep the heat in, but

proposed that heat from the interior rather than sunlight was

the principal energy source. The Pioneer 12 mission to

Venus in 1978 dropped entry probes into the atmosphere;

they showed directly that the ordinary greenhouse effect—

the surface heated by the Sun and the heat retained by the

blanket of air—was the operative cause. But it's Venus that

got Hansen thinking about the greenhouse effect.

Radio astronomers, you note, find Venus to be an

intense source of radio waves. Other explanations of the

radio emission fail. You conclude that the surface must be

ridiculously hot. You try to understand where the high

temperatures come from and are led inexorably to one or

another kind of greenhouse effect. Decades later you find

that this training has prepared you to understand and help

predict an unexpected threat to our global civilization. I

know many other instances where scientists who first tried

to puzzle out the atmospheres of other worlds are making

important and highly practical discoveries about this one.

The other planets are a superb training ground for students

of the Earth. They require both breadth and depth of

knowledge, and they chal enge the imagination.

Those who are skeptical about carbon dioxide

greenhouse warming might profitably note the massive

greenhouse effect on Venus. No one proposes that

Venus's greenhouse effect derives froth imprudent

Venusians who burned too much coal, drove fuel-inefficient

autos, and cut down their forests. My point is different. The

climatological history of our planetary neighbor, an

otherwise Earthlike planet on which the surface became hot

enough to melt tin or lead, is worth considering—especial y

by those who say that the increasing greenhouse effect on

Earth wil be self-correcting, that we don't real y have to

worry about it, or (you can see this in the publications of

some groups that cal themselves conservative) that the

greenhouse effect itself is a "hoax."

(3) Nuclear winter is the predicted darkening and cooling

of the Earth—mainly from fine smoke particles injected into

the atmosphere from the burning of cities and petroleum

facilities—that is predicted to fol ow a global thermonuclear

war. A vigorous scientific debate ensued on just how

serious nuclear winter might be. The various opinions have

now converged. Al three-dimensional general circulation

computer models predict that the global temperatures

resulting from a worldwide thermonuclear war would be

colder than those in the Pleistocene ice ages. The

implications for our planetary civilization—especial y

through the col apse of agriculture—are very dire. It is a

consequence of nuclear war that was somehow overlooked

by the civil and military authorities of the United States, the

Soviet Union, Britain, France, and China when they

decided to accumulate wel over 60,000 nuclear weapons.

Although it's hard to be certain about such things, a case

can be made that nuclear Winter played a constructive role

(there were other causes, of course) in convincing the

nuclear-armed nations, especial y the Soviet Union, of the

futility of nuclear war.

Nuclear winter was first calculated and named in

1982/83 by a group of five scientists, to which I'm proud to

belong. This team was given the acronym TTAPS (for

Richard P. Turco, (even B. Toon, Thomas Ackerman,

James Pol ack, and myself). Of the five TTAPS scientists,

two were planetary scientists, and the other three had

published many papers in planetary science, The earliest

intimation of nuclear winter came during that same Mariner

9 mission to Mars, when there was a global dust storm and

we were unable to see the surface of the planet; the

infrared spectrometer on the spacecraft found the high

atmosphere to be warmer and the surface colder than they

ought to have been. Jim Pol ack and I sat down and tried to

calculate how that could come about. Over the subsequent

twelve years, this line of inquiry led from dust storms on

Mars to volcanic aerosols on Earth to the possible

extinction of the dinosaurs by impact dust to nuclear winter.

You never know where science wil take you.





PLANETARY SCIENCE fosters a broad interdisciplinary point of

view that proves enormously helpful in discovering and

attempting to defuse these looming environmental

catastrophes. When you cut your teeth on other worlds, you

gain a perspective about the fragility of planetary

environments and about what other, quite different,

environments are possible. There may wel be potential

global catastrophes stil to be uncovered. If there are, I bet

planetary scientists wil play a central role in understanding

them.

Of al the fields of mathematics, technology, and science,

the one with the greatest international cooperation (as

determined by how often the co-authors of research papers

hail from two or more countries) is the field cal ed "Earth

and space sciences." Studying this world and others, by its

very nature, tends to be non-local, non-nationalist, non-

chauvinist. Very rarely do people go into these fields

because they are internationalists. Almost always, they

enter for other reasons, and then discover that splendid

work, work that complements their own, is being done by

researchers in other nations; or that to solve a problem, you

need data or a perspective (access to the southern sky, for

example) that is unavailable in your country. And once you

experience such cooperation—humans from different parts

of the planet working in a mutual y intel igible scientific

language as partners on matters of common concern—it's

hard not to imagine it happening on other, nonscientific

matters. I myself consider this aspect of Earth and space

sciences as a healing and unifying force in world politics;

but, beneficial or not, it is inescapable.

When I look at the evidence, it seems to me that

planetary exploration is of the most practical and urgent

utility for us here on Earth. Even if we were not roused by

the prospect of exploring other worlds, even if we didn't

have a nanogram of adventuresome spirit in us, even if we

were only concerned for ourselves and in the narrowest

sense, planetary exploration would stil constitute a superb

investment.

C H A P T

E R 1 5

THE GATES OF

THE

WONDER

WORLD

OPEN

The great

floodgates of the wonder-world swung

open.

—

HERMAN

MELVILLE, MOBY

DICK, CHAPTER 1 (1851)

Sometime coming up, perhaps just around the corner,

there wil be a nation—more likely, a consortium of nations

—that wil work the next major step in the human venture

into space. Perhaps it wil be brought about by

circumventing bureaucracies and making efficient use of

present technologies. Perhaps it wil require new

technologies, transcending the great blunderbuss chemical

rockets. The crews of these ships wil set foot on new

worlds. The first baby wil be born somewhere up there.

Early steps toward living off the land wil be made. We wil

be on our way. And the future wil remember.

TANTALIZING AND MAJESTIC , Mars is the world next door, the

nearest planet on which an astronaut or cosmonaut could

safely land. Although it is sometimes as warm as a New

England October, Mars is a chil y place, so cold that some

of its thin carbon dioxide atmosphere freezes out as dry ice

at the winter pole.

It is the nearest planet whose surface we can see with a

smal telescope. In al the Solar System, it is the planet

most like Earth. Apart from flybys, there have been only two

ful y successful missions to Mars: Mariner 9 in 1971, and

Vikings 1 and 2 in 1976. They revealed a deep rift val ey

that would stretch from New York to San Francisco;

immense volcanic mountains, the largest of which towers

80,000 feet above the average altitude of the Martian

surface, almost three times the height of Mount Everest; an

intricate layered structure in and among the polar ices,

resembling a pile of discarded poker chips, and probably a

record of past climatic change; bright and dark streaks

painted down on the surface by windblown dust, providing

high-speed wind maps of Mars over the past decades and

centuries; vast globe-girdling dust storms; and enigmatic

surface features.

Hundreds of sinuous channels and val ey networks dating

back several bil ion years can be found, mainly in the

cratered southern highlands. They suggest a previous

epoch of more benign and Earthlike conditions—very

different from what we find beneath the tenuous and frigid

atmosphere of our time. Some ancient channels seem to

have been carved by rainfal , some by underground

sapping and col apse, and some by great floods that

gushed up out of the ground. Rivers were pouring into and

fil ing great thousand-kilometer-diameter impact basins that

today are dry as dust. Waterfal s dwarfing any on Earth

today cascaded into the lakes of ancient Mars. Vast

oceans, hundreds of meters, perhaps even a kilometer,

deep may have gently lapped shorelines barely discernible

today. That would have been a world to explore. We are

four bil ion years late.[†††††††]

On Earth in just the same period, the first

microorganisms arose and evolved. Life on Earth is

intimately connected, for the most basic chemical reasons,

with liquid water. We humans are ourselves made of some

three-quarters water. The same sorts of organic molecules

that fel out of the sky and were generated in the air and

seas of ancient Earth, should also have accumulated on

ancient Mars. Is it plausible that life quickly came to be in

the waters of early Earth, but was somehow restrained and

inhibited in the waters of early Mars? Or might the Martian

seas have been fil ed with life—floating, spawning,

evolving? What strange beasts once swum there?

Whatever the dramas of those distant times, it al started

to go wrong around 3.8 bil ion years ago. We can see that

the erosion of ancient craters dramatical y began to slow

about then. As the atmosphere thinned, as the rivers flowed

no more, as the oceans began to dry, as the temperatures

plummeted, life would have retreated to the few remaining

congenial habitats, perhaps huddling at the bottom of ice-

covered lakes, until it too vanished and the dead bodies

and fossil remains of exotic organisms—built, it might be,

on principles very different from life on Earth—were deep-

frozen, awaiting the explorers who might in some distant

future arrive on Mars.

METEORITES ARE FRAGMENTS OF OTHER WORLDS recovered on

Earth. Most originate in col isions among the numerous

asteroids that orbit the Sun between the orbits of Mars and

Jupiter. But a few are generated when a large meteorite

impacts a planet or asteroid at high speed, gouges out a

crater, and propels the excavated surface material into

space. A very smal fraction of the ejected rocks, mil ions of

years later, may intercept another world.

In the wastelands of Antarctica, the ice is here and

there dotted with meteorites, preserved by the low

temperatures and until recently undisturbed by humans. A

few

of

them,

cal ed

SNC

(pronounced

"snick")

meteorites[‡‡‡‡‡‡‡] have an aspect about them that at

first seemed almost unbelievable: Deep inside their

mineral and glassy structures, locked away from the

contaminating influence of the Earth's atmosphere, a little

gas is trapped. When the gas is analyzed, it turns out to

have exactly the same chemical composition and isotopic

ratios as the air on Mars. We know about Martian air not

just from spectroscopic inference but from direct

measurement on the Martian surface by the Viking landers.

To the surprise of nearly everyone, the SNC meteorites

come from Mars.

Original y, they were rocks that had melted and refrozen.

Radioactive dating of al the SNC meteorites shows their

parent rocks condensed out of lava between 180 mil ion

and 1.3 bil ion years ago. Then they were driven off the

planet by col isions from space. From how long they've

been exposed to cosmic rays on their interplanetary

journeys between Mars and Earth, we can tel how old they

are—how long ago they were ejected from Mars. In this

sense, they are between 10 mil ion and 700,000 years old.

They sample the most recent 0.l percent of Martian history.

Some of the minerals they contain show clear evidence

of having once been in water, warm liquid water. These

hydro-thermal minerals reveal that somehow, probably al

over Mars, there was recent liquid water. Perhaps it came

about when the interior heat melted underground ice. But

however it happened, it's natural to wonder if life is not

entirely extinct, if somehow it's managed to hang on into our

time in transient underground lakes, or even in thin films of

water wetting subsurface grains.

The geochemists Everett Gibson and Hal Karlsson of

NASA's Johnson Space Flight Center have extracted a

single drop of water from one of the SNC meteorites. The

isotopic ratios of the oxygen and hydrogen atoms that it

contains are literal y unearthly. I look on this water from

another world as an encouragement for future explorers

and settlers.

Imagine what we might find if a large number of samples,

including never melted soil and rocks, were returned to

Earth from Martian locales selected for their scientific

interest. We are very close to being able to accomplish this

with smal roving robot vehicles.

The transportation of subsurface material from world to

world raises a tantalizing question: Four bil ion years ago

there were two neighboring planets, both warm, both wet.

Impacts from space, in the final stages of the accretion of

these planets, were occurring at a much higher rate than

today. Samples from each world were being flung out into

space. We are sure there was life on at least one of them in

this period. We know that a fraction of the ejected debris

stays cool throughout the processes of impact, ejection,

and interception by another world. So could some of the

early organisms on Earth have been safely transplanted to

Mars four bil ion years ago, initiating life on that planet' Or,

even more speculative, could life on Earth have arisen by

such a transfer from Mars? Might the two planets have

regularly exchanged life-forms for hundreds of mil ions of

years? The notion might be testable. If we were to discover

life on Mars and found it very similar to life on Earth—and if,

as wel , e were sure it wasn't microbial contamination that

we ourselves had introduced in the course of our

explorations—the proposition that life was long ago

transferred across interplanetary space would have to be

taken seriously.

IT WAS ONCE THOUGHT that life is abundant on Mars. Even the

dour and skeptical astronomer Simon Newcomb (in his

Astronomy f o r Everybody, which went through many

editions in the early decades of this century and was the

astronomy text of my childhood) concluded, "There appears

to be life on the planet Mars. A few years ago this

statement was commonly regarded as fantastic. Now it is

commonly accepted." Not "intel igent human life," he was

quick to add, but green plants. However, we have now been

to Mars and looked for plants—as wel as animals,

microbes, and intel igent beings. Even if the other forms

were absent, we might have imagined, as in Earth's

deserts today, and as on Earth for almost al its history,

abundant microbial life.

The "life detection" experiments on Viking were

designed to detect only a certain subset of conceivable

biologies; they were biased to find the kind of life about

which we know. It would have been foolish to send

instruments that could not even detect life on Earth. They

were exquisitely sensitive, able to find microbes in the most

unpromising, arid deserts and wastelands on Earth.

One experiment measured the gases exchanged

between Martian soil and the Martian atmosphere in the

presence of organic matter from Earth. A second brought a

wide variety organic foodstuffs marked by a radioactive

tracer to see if there were bugs in the Martian soil who ate

the food and oxidized it to radioactive carbon dioxide. A

third experiment introduced radioactive carbon dioxide

(and carbon monoxide) to the Martian soil to see if any of it

was taken up by Martian microbes. To the initial

astonishment of, I think, al the scientists involved, each of

the three experiments gave what at first seemed to be

positive results. Gases were exchanged; organic matter

was oxidized; carbon dioxide was incorporated into the

soil.

But there are reasons for caution. These provocative

results are not general y thought to be good evidence for

life on Mars: The putative metabolic processes of Martian

microbes occurred under a very wide range of conditions

inside the Viking landers—wet (with liquid water brought

from Earth) and dry, light and dark, cold (only a little above

freezing) to hot (almost the normal boiling point of water).

Many microbiologists deem it unlikely that Martian

microbes would be so capable under such varied

conditions. Another strong inducement to skepticism is that

a fourth experiment, to look for organic chemicals in the

Martian soil, gave uniformly negative results despite its

sensitivity. We expect life on Mars, like life on Earth, to be

organized around carbon-based molecules. To find no such

molecules at al was daunting for optimists among the

exobiologists.

The apparently positive results of the life detection

experiments is now general y attributed to chemicals that

oxidize the soil, deriving ultimately from ultraviolet sunlight

(as discussed in the previous chapter). There is stil a

handful of Viking scientists who wonder if there might be

extremely tough and competent organisms very thinly

spread over the Martian soil—so their organic chemistry

could not be detected, but their metabolic processes could.

Such scientists do not deny that ultraviolet-generated

oxidants are present in the Martian soil, but stress that no

thorough explanation of the liking life detection results from

oxidants alone has been forthcoming. Tentative claims

have been made of organic matter in SNC meteorites, but

they seem instead to be contaminants that have entered

the meteorite after its arrival on our world. So far, there are

no claims of Martian microbes in these rocks from the sky.

Perhaps because it seems to pander to public interest,

NASA and most Viking scientists have been very chary

about pursuing the biological hypothesis. Even now, much

more could be done in going over the old data, in looking

with Viking-type instruments at Antarctic and other soils that

have few microbes in them, in laboratory simulation of the

role of oxidants in the Martian soil, and in designing

experiments to elucidate these matters—not excluding

further searches for life—with future Mars landers.

If indeed no unambiguous signatures of life were

determined by a variety of sensitive experiments at two

sites 5,000 kilometers apart on a planet marked by global

wind transport of fine particles, this is at least suggestive

that Mars may be, today at least, a lifeless planet. But if

Mars is lifeless, we have two planets, of virtual y identical

age and early conditions, evolving next door to one another

in the same polar system: Life evolves and proliferates on

one, but not the other. Why?

Perhaps the chemical or fossil remains of early Martian

life can stil be found—subsurface, safely protected from

the ultraviolet radiation and its oxidation products that today

fry the surface. Perhaps in a rock face exposed by a

landslide, or in the banks of an ancient river val ey or dry

lake bed, or in the polar, laminated terrain, key evidence for

life on another planet is waiting.

Despite its absence on the surface of Mars, the planet's

two moons, Phobos and Deimos, seem to be rich in

complex organic matter dating back to the early history of

the Solar System. The Soviet Phobos 2 spacecraft found

evidence of water vapor being out-gassed from Phobos, as

if it has an icy interior heated by radioactivity. The moons of

Mars may have long ago been captured from somewhere

in the outer Solar System; conceivably, they are among the

nearest available examples of unaltered stuff from the

earliest days of the Solar System. Phobos and Deimos are

very smal , each roughly 10 kilometers across; the gravity

they exert is nearly negligible. So it's comparatively easy to

rendezvous with them, land on them, examine them, use

them as a base of operations to study Mars, and then go

home.

Mars cal s, a storehouse of scientific information—

important in its own right but also for the light it casts on the

environment of our own planet. There are mysteries waiting

to be resolved about the interior of Mars and its mode of

origin, the nature of volcanos on a world without plate

tectonics, the sculpting of landforms on a planet with

sandstorms undreamt of on Earth, glaciers and polar

landforms, the escape of planetary atmospheres, and the

capture of moons—to mention a more or less random

sampling of scientific puzzles. If Mars once had abundant

liquid water and a clement climate, what went wrong? How

did an Earthlike world become so parched, frigid, and

comparatively airless? Is there something here we should

know about our own planet?

We humans have been this way before. The ancient

explorers would have understood the cal of Mars. But mere

scientific exploration does not require a human presence.

We tan always send smart robots. They are far cheaper,

they don't talk back, you can send them to much more

dangerous locales, arid, with some chance of mission

failure always before us, no lives are put at risk.

"HAVE YOU SEEN ME?" the back of the milk carton read. "Mars

Ob server, 6' x 4.5' x 3', 2500 kg. Last heard from on

8/21/93, 627,000 km from Mars."

"M. O. cal home" was the plaintive message on a banner

hung outside the jet Propulsion Laboratory's Mission

Operations Facility in late August 1993. The failure of the

United States' Mars Observer spacecraft just before it was

to insert itself into orbit around Mars was a great

disappointment. It was the first post-launch mission failure

of an American lunar or planetary spacecraft in 26 years.

Many scientists and engineers had devoted a decade of

their professional lives to M. O. It was the first U.S. mission

to Mars in 17 years—since Viking's two orbiters and two

landers in 1976. It was also the first real post-Cold War

spacecraft: Russian scientists were on several of the

investigator teams, and Mars Observer was to act as an

essential radio relay link for larders from what was then

scheduled to be the Russian Mars '94 mission, as wel as

for a daring rover and bal oon mission slated for Mars '96.

The scientific instruments aboard Mars Observer would

have napped the geochemistry of the planet and prepared

the way for future missions, guiding landing site decisions.

It might have cast a new light on the massive climate

change that seems to have occurred in early Martian

history. It would have photographed some of the surface of

Mars with detail better than two meters across. Of course,

we do not know what wonders Mars Observer would have

uncovered. But every time we examine a world with new

instruments and in vastly improved detail, a dazzling array

of discoveries emerges just as it did when Galileo turned

the first telescope toward the heavens and opened the era

of modern astronomy.

According to the Commission of Inquiry, the cause of the

failure was probably a rupture of the fuel tank during

pressurization, gases and liquids sputtering out, and the

wounded spacecraft spinning wildly out of control. Perhaps

it was avoidable. Perhaps it was an unlucky accident. But

to keep this matter in perspective, let's consider the ful

range of missions to the Moon and the planets attempted

by the United States and the former Soviet Union:

In the beginning, our track records were poor. Space

vehicles blew up at launch, missed their targets, or failed to

function when they got there. As time went on, we humans

got ;)otter at interplanetary flight. There was a learning

curve. The ,adjacent figures show these curves (based on

NASA data with NASA definitions of mission success). We

learned very wel . Our present ability to fix spacecraft in

flight is best il ustrated by the Voyager missions described

earlier.

We see that it wasn't until about its thirty-fifth launch to the

Moon or the planets that the cumulative U.S. mission

success rate got as high as 50 percent. The Russians took

about 50 launches to get there. Averaging the shaky start

and the better recent performance, we find that both the

United States and Russia have a cumulative launch

success rate of about 80 percent. But the cumulative

mission success rate is stil under 70 percent for the U.S.

and under 60 percent for the U.S.S.R./Russia. Equivalently,

lunar and planetary missions have failed on average 30 or

40 percent of the time.

Missions to other worlds were from the beginning at the

cutting edge of technology. They continue to be so today.

They .ire designed with redundant subsystems, and

operated by dedicated and experienced engineers, but

they are not perfect. The amazing thing is not that we have

done so poorly, but that we leave done so wel .

We don't know whether the Mars Observer failure was

due to incompetence or just statistics. But we must expect

a steady background of mission failures when we explore

other worlds. No human lives are risked when a robot

spacecraft is lost. Even if we were able to improve this

success rate significantly, it would be far too costly. It is

much better to take more risks and fly more spacecraft:.

Knowing about irreducible risks, why do we these days

fly only one spacecraft per mission? In 1962 Mariner 1,

intended for Venus, fel into the Atlantic; the nearly identical

Mariner 2 became the human species' first successful

planetary mission. Mariner 3 failed, arid its twin Mariner 4

became, in 1964, the first spacecraft to take close-up

pictures of Mars. Or consider the 1971 Mariner 8/Mariner

9 dual launch mission to Mars. Mariner 8 Was to map the

planet. Mariner 9 was to study the enigmatic seasonal and

secular changes of surface markings. The spacecraft were

otherwise identical. Mariner 8 fel into the ocean. Mariner 9

flew on to Mars arid became the first spacecraft in human

history to orbit another planet. It discovered the volcanos,

the laminated terrain in the polar caps, the ancient river

val eys, and the aeolian nature of the surface changes. It

disproved the "canals." It mapped the planet pole to pole

and revealed al the major geological features of Mars

known to us today. It provided the first close-up

observations of members of a whole class of smal worlds

(by targeting the Martian moons, Phobos and Deimos). If

we had launched only Mariner 8, the endeavor would have

been an unmitigated failure. With a dual launch it became a

bril iant and historic success.

There were also two Vikings, two Voyagers, two

Vegas, many pairs of Veneras. Why was only one Mars

Observer flown? The standard answer is cost. Part of the

reason it was so costly, though, is that it was planned to be

launched by shuttle, which is an almost absurdly expensive

booster for planetary missions—in this case too expensive

for two M. O. launches. After many shuttle-connected delays

and cost increases, NASA changed its mind and decided

to launch Mars Observer on a Titan booster. This required

an additional two-year delay and an adapter to mate the

spacecraft to the new launch vehicle. If NASA had not been

so intent on providing business for the increasingly

uneconomic shuttle, we could have launched a couple of

years earlier and maybe with two spacecraft instead of

one.

But whether in single launches or in pairs, the space-

faring nations have clearly decided that the time is ripe to

return robot explorers to Mars. Mission designs change;

new nations enter the field; old nations find they no longer

have the resources. Even already funded programs cannot

always be relied upon. But current plans do reveal

something of the intensity of effort and the depth of

dedication.

As I write this book, there are tentative plans by the

United States, Russia, France, Germany, Japan, Austria,

Finland, Italy, Canada, the European Space Agency, and

other entities for a coordinated robotic exploration of Mars.

In the seven years between 1996 and 2003, a flotil a of

some twenty-five spacecraft—most of them comparatively

smal and cheap—are to be sent from Earth to Mars. There

wil be no quick flybys among them; these are al long-

duration orbiter and lander missions. The United States wil

re-fly al of the scientific instruments that were lost on Mars

Observer. The Russian spacecraft wil contain particularly

ambitious experiments involving some twenty nations.

Communications satel ites wil permit experimental stations

anywhere on Mars to relay their data back to Earth.

Penetrators screeching down from orbit wil punch into the

Martian soil, transmitting data from underground.

Instrumented bal oons and roving laboratories wil wander

over the sands of Mars. Some microrobots wil weigh no

more than a few pounds. Landing sites are being planned

and coordinated. Instruments wil be cross-calibrated. Data

wil be freely exchanged. There is every reason to think that

in the coming years Mars and its mysteries wil become

increasingly familiar to the inhabitants of the planet Earth.

IN THE COMMAND CENTER on Earth, in a special room, you are

helmeted and gloved. You turn your head to the left, and the

cameras on the Mars robot rover turn to the left. You see, in

very high definition and in color, what the cameras see. You

take a step forward, and the rover walks forward. You reach

out your arm to pick up something shiny in the soil, and the

robot arm does likewise. The sands of Mars trickle through

your fingers. The only difficulty with this remote reality

technology is that al this must occur in tedious slow motion:

The round-trip travel time of the up-link commands from

Earth to Mars and the down-link data returned from Mars to

Earth might take half an hour or more. But this is something

we can learn to do. We can learn to contain our exploratory

impatience if that's the price of exploring Mars. The rover

can be made smart enough to deal with routine

contingencies. Anything more chal enging, and it makes a

dead stop, puts itself into a safeguard mode, and radios for

a very patient human control er to take over.

Conjure up roving, smart robots, each of them a smal

scientific laboratory, landing in the safe but dul places and

wandering to view close-up some of that profusion of

Martian Wonders. Perhaps every day a robot would rove to

its own horizon; each morning we would see close-up what

had yesterday been only a distant eminence. The

lengthening progress of a traverse route over the Martian

landscape would appear oil news programs and in

schoolrooms. People would speculate on what wil be

found. Nightly newscasts from another planet, with their

revelations of new terrains and new scientific findings

would make everyone on Earth a party to the adventure.

Then there's Martian virtual reality: The data sent back

from Mars, stored in a modern computer, are fed into your

helmet and gloves and boots. You are walking in an empty

room on Earth, but to you you are on Mars: pink skies,

fields of boulders, sand dunes stretching to the horizon

where an immense volcano looms; you hear the sand

crunching under your boots, you turn rocks over, dig a hole,

sample the thin air, turn a corner, and come face to face

with . . . whatever new discoveries we wil make on Mars—

al exact copies of what's on Mars, and al experienced

from the safety of a virtual reality salon in your hometown.

This is not why we explore Mars, but clearly we wil need

robot explorers to return the real reality before it can be

reconfigured into virtual reality.

Especial y with continuing investment in robotics and

machine intel igence, sending humans to Mars can't be

justified by science alone. And many more people can

experience the virtual Mars than could possibly be sent to

the real one. We can do very wel with robots. If we're going

to send people, we'l need a better reason than science

and exploration.

In the 1980s, I thought I saw a coherent justification for

human missions to Mars. I imagined the United States and

the Soviet Union, the two Cold War rivals that had put our

global civilization at risk, joining together in a far-seeing,

high-technology endeavor that would give hope to people

everywhere. I pictured a kind of Apol o program in reverse,

in which cooperation, not competition, was the driving

force, in which tire two leading space-faring nations would

together lay the groundwork for a major advance in human

history—the eventual settlement of another planet.

The symbolism seemed so apt. The same technology

that can propel apocalyptic weapons from continent to

continent would enable the first human voyage to another

planet. It was a choice of fitting mythic power: to embrace

the planet named after, rather the madness ascribed to, the

god of war.

We succeeded in interesting Soviet scientists and

engineers in such a joint endeavor. Roald Sagdeev, then

director of the Institute for Space Research of the Soviet

Academy of Sciences in Moscow, was already deeply

engaged in international cooperation on Soviet robotic

missions to Venus, Mars, and Hal ey's Comet, long before

the idea became fashionable. Projected joint use of the

Soviet Mir space station and the Saturn V-class launch

vehicle Energiya made cooperation attractive to the Soviet

organizations that manufactured these items of hardware;

they were otherwise having difficulty justifying their wares.

Through a sequence of arguments (helping to bring the

Cold War to an end being chief among them), then-Soviet

leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev was convinced. During the

December 1987 Washington summit, Mr. Gorbachev—

asked what was the most important joint activity through

which the two countries might symbolize the change in their

relationship—unhesitatingly replied, "Let's go to Mars

together."

But the Reagan Administration was not interested.

Cooperating with the Soviets, acknowledging that certain

Soviet technologies were more advanced than their

American counterparts, making some American technology

available to the Soviets, sharing credit, providing an

alternative for the arms manufacturers—these were not to

the Administration's liking. The offer was turned down. Mars

would have to wait.

In only a few years, times have changed. The Cold War is

over. The Soviet Union is no more. The benefit deriving

from the two nations working together has lost some of its

force. Other nations—especial y Japan and the constituent

members of the European Space Agency—have become

interplanetary travelers. Many just and urgent demands are

levied on the discretionary budgets of the nations.

But the Energiya heavy-lift booster stil awaits a mission.

The workhorse Proton rocket is available. The Mir space

station—with a crew on board almost continuously—stil

orbits the Earth every hour and a half. Despite internal

turmoil, the Russian space program continues vigorously.

Cooperation between Russia and America in space is

accelerating. A Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, in

1994 flew on the shuttle Discovery (for the usual one-week

shuttle mission duration; Krikalev had already logged 464

days aboard the Mi r space station). U.S. astronauts wil

visit Mir. American instruments—including one to examine

the oxidants thought to destroy organic molecules in the

Martian soil—are to be carried by Russian space vehicles

to Mars. Mars Observer was designed to serve as a relay

station for landers in Russian Mars missions. The Russians

have offered to include a U.S. orbiter in a forthcoming

Proton-launched multipayload mission to Mars.

The American and Russian capabilities in space science

and technology mesh; they interdigitate. Each is strong

where the other is weak. This is a marriage made in

heaven-but one that has been surprisingly difficult to

consummate.

On September 2, 1993, an agreement to cooperate in

depth was signed in Washington by Vice President Al Gore

and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. The Clinton

Administration has ordered NASA to redesign the U.S.

space station (cal ed Freedom in the Reagan years) so it is

in the same orbit as Mir and can be mated to it: Japanese

and European modules wil be attached, as wil a Canadian

robot arm. The designs have now evolved into what is

cal ed Space Station Al pha, involving almost al the

spacefaring nations. (China is the most notable exception.)

In return for U.S. space cooperation and an infusion of

hard currency, Russia in effect agreed to halt its sale of

bal istic missile components to other nations, and general y

to exercise tight controls on its export of strategic weapons

technology. In this Way, space becomes once again, as it

was at the height of the Cold War, an instrument of national

strategic policy.

This new trend has, though, made some of the American

aerospace industry and some key members of Congress

profoundly uneasy. Without international competition, can

we motivate such ambitious efforts? Does every Russian

launch vehicle used cooperatively mean less support for the

American aerospace industry? Can Americans rely on

stable support and continuity of effort in joint projects with

the Russians? (The Russians, of course, ask similar

questions about the Americans.) But cooperative programs

in the long term save money, draw upon the extraordinary

scientific and engineering talent distributed over our planet,

and provide inspiration about the global future. There may

be fluctuations in national commitments. We are likely to

take backward as wel as forward steps. But the overal

trend seems clear.

Despite growing pains, the space programs of the two

former adversaries are beginning to join. It is now possible

to foresee a world space station—not of any one nation but

of the planet Earth—being assembled at 51° inclination to

the equator and a few hundred miles up. A dramatic joint

mission, cal ed "Fire and Ice," is being discussed in which

a fast flyby would be sent to Pluto, the last unexplored

planet; but to get there, a gravity assist from the Sun would

be employed, in the course of Which smal probes would

actual y enter the Sun's atmosphere. And we seem to be on

the threshold of a World Consortium for the scientific

exploration of Mars. It very much looks as though such

projects wil be done cooperatively or not at al .

WHETHER THERE ARE VALID, cost-effective, broadly supportable

reasons for people to venture to Mars is an open question.

Certainly there is no consensus. The matter is treated in the

next chapter.

I would argue that if we are not eventual y going to send

people to worlds as far away as Mars, we have lost the

chief reason for a space station—a permanently (or

intermittently) occupied human outpost in Earth orbit. A

space station is far from an optimum platform for doing

science either looking down at the Earth, or looking out into

space, or for utilizing microgravity (the very presence of

astronauts messes things up). For military reconnaissance

it is much inferior to robotic spacecraft. There are no

compel ing economic or manufacturing applications. It is

expensive compared to robotic spacecraft. And of course it

runs some risk of losing human lives. Every shuttle launch to

help build or supply a space station has an estimated 1 or

2 percent chance of catastrophic failure. Previous civilian

and military space activities have littered low Earth orbit

with fast-moving debris—that sooner or later wil col ide

with a space station (although, so far, M i r has had no

failures from this hazard). A space station is also

unnecessary for human exploration of the Moon. Apol o got

there very wel with no space station at al . With Saturn V or

Energiya class launchers, it also may be possible to get to

near-earth asteroids or even Mars without having to

assemble the interplanetary vehicle on an orbiting space

station.

A space station could serve inspirational and

educational purposes, and it certainly can help to solidify

relations among the spacefaring nations—particularly the

United States and Russia. But the only substantive function

of a space station, as far as I can see, is for long-duration

spaceflight. How do humans behave in micro gravity? How

can we counter progressive changes in blood chemistry

and an estimated 6 percent bone loss per year in zero

gravity? (For a three- or four-year mission to Mars this adds

up, if the travelers have to go at zero g.)

These are hardly questions in fundamental biology such

as DNA or the evolutionary process; instead they address

issues of applied human biology. It's important to know the

answers, but only if we intend to go somewhere in space

that's far away and takes a long time to get there. The only

tangible and coherent goal of a space station is eventual

human missions to near-Earth asteroids, Mars, and

beyond. Historical y NASA has been cautious about stating

this fact clearly, probably for fear that members of

Congress wil throw up their hands in disgust, denounce the

space station as the thin edge of an extremely expensive

wedge, and declare the country unready to commit to

launching people to Mars. In effect, then, NASA has kept

quiet about what the space station is real y for. And yet if

we had such a space station, nothing would require us to

go straight to Mars. We could use a space station to

accumulate and refine the relevant knowledge, and take as

long as we like to do so—so that when the time does

come, when we are ready to go to the planets, we wil have

the background and experience to do so safely.

The Mars Observer failure, and the catastrophic loss of

the space shuttle Challenger in 1986, remind us that there

wil be a certain irreducible chance of disaster in future

human flights to Mars and elsewhere. The Apollo 13

mission, which was unable to land on the Moon and barely

returned safely to Earth, underscores how lucky we've

been. We cannot make perfectly safe autos or trains even

though we've been at it for more than a century. Hundreds

of thousands of years after we first domesticated fire, every

city in the world has a service of firefighters biding their

time until there's a blaze that needs putting out. In

Columbus' four voyages to the New World, he lost ships left

and right, including one third of the little fleet that set out in

1492.

If we are to send people, it must be for a very good

reason—and with a realistic understanding that almost

certainly we wil lose lives. Astronauts and cosmonauts

have always understood this. Nevertheless, there has been

and wil be no shortage of volunteers.

But why Mars? Why not return to the Moon? It's nearby,

and we've proved we know how to send people there. I'm

concerned that the Moon, close as it is, is a long detour, if

not a dead end. We've been there. We've even brought

some of it back. People have seen the Moon rocks, and,

for reasons that I believe are fundamental y sound, they are

bored by the Moon. It's a static, airless, waterless, black-

sky, dead world. Its most interesting aspect perhaps is its

cratered surface, a record of ancient ,catastrophic impacts,

on the Earth as wel as on the Moon.

Mars, by contrast, has weather, dust storms, its own

moons, volcanos, polar ice caps, peculiar landforms,

ancient river val eys, and evidence of massive climatic

change on a once-Earthlike world. It holds some prospect

of past or maybe even present life, and is the most

congenial planet for future life—humans transplanted from

Earth, living off the land. None of this is true for the Moon.

Mars also has its own legible cratering history. It Mars,

rather than the Moon, had been within easy reach, we

would not have backed off from manned space flight.

Nor is the Moon an especial y desirable test bed or way

station for Mars. The Martian and lunar environments are

very different, and the Moon is as distant from Mars as is

the Earth. The machinery for Martian exploration can at

least equal y wel be tested in Earth orbit, or on near-Earth

asteroids, or on the Earth itself—in Antarctica, for instance.

Japan has tended to be skeptical of the commitment of

the United States and other nations to plan and execute

major cooperative projects in space. This is at least one

reason that Japan, more than any other spacefaring nation,

has tended to go it alone. The Lunar and Planetary Society

of Japan is an organization representing space enthusiasts

in the government, universities, and major industries. As I

write, the Society is proposing to construct and stock a

lunar base entirely with robot labor. It is said to take about

30 years and to cost about a bil ion U.S. dol ars a year

(which would represent 7 percent of the present U.S.

civilian space budget). Humans would arrive only when the

base is ful y ready. The use of robot construction crews

under radio command from Earth is said to reduce the cost

tenfold. The only trouble with the scheme, according to

reports, is that other scientists in Japan keep asking,

"What's it for?" That's a good question in every nation.

The first human mission to Mars is now probably too

expensive for any one nation to pul off by itself. Nor is it

fitting that such a historic step be taken by representatives

of only a smal fraction of the human species. But a

cooperative venture among the United States, Russia,

Japan, the European Space Agency—and perhaps other

nations, such as China—might be feasible in the not too

distant future. The international space station wil have

tested our ability to work together on great engineering

projects in space.

The cost of sending a kilogram of something no farther

away than low Earth orbit is today about the same as the

cost of kilogram of gold. This is surely a major reason we

have yet to stride the ancient shorelines of Mars. Multistage

chemical rockets are the means that first took us into

space, and that's what we've been using ever since. We've

tried to refine them, to make there safer, more reliable,

simpler, cheaper. But that hasn't happened, or at least not

nearly as quickly as many had hoped.

So maybe there's a better way: maybe single-stage

rockets that can launch their payloads directly to orbit;

maybe many smal payloads shot from guns or rocket-

launched from airplanes; maybe supersonic ramjets.

Maybe there's something much better that we haven't

thought of yet. If we can manufacture propel ants for the

return trip from the air and soil of our destination world, the

difficulty of the voyage would be greatly eased.

Once we're up there in space, venturing to the planets,

rocketry is not necessarily the best means to move large

payloads around, even with gravity assists. Today, we

make a few early rocket burns and later midcourse

corrections, and coast the rest of the way. But there are

promising ion and nuclear/ electric propulsion systems by

which a smal and steady acceleration is exerted. Or, as the

Russian space pioneer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky first

envisioned, we could employ solar sails—vast but very thin

films that catch sunlight and the solar wind, a caravel

kilometers wide plying the void between the worlds.

Especial y for trips to Mars and beyond, such methods are

far better than rockets.

As with most technologies, when something barely

works, when it's the first of its kind, there's a natural

tendency to improve it, develop it, exploit it. Soon there's

such an institutional investment in the original technology,

no matter how flawed, that it's very hard to move on to

something better. NASA has almost no resources to

pursue alternative propulsion technologies. That money

would have to come out of near-term missions, missions

which could provide concrete results and improve NASA's

success

record.

Spending

money

on

alternative

technologies pays off a decade or two in the future. We

tend to be very little interested in a decade or two in the

future. This is one of the ways by which initial success can

sow the seeds of ultimate failure; and is very similar to what

sometimes happens in biological evolution. But sooner or

later some nation—perhaps one without a huge investment

in marginal y effective technology—wil develop effective

alternatives.

Even before then, if we take a cooperative path, there wil

come a time—perhaps in the first decades of the new

century and the new mil ennium—when an interplanetary

spacecraft is assembled in Earth orbit, the progress in ful

view on the evening news. Astronauts and cosmonauts,

hovering like gnats, guide and mate the prefabricated

parts. Eventual y the ship, tested and ready, is boarded by

its international crew, and boosted to escape velocity. For

the whole of the voyage to Mars and back, the lives of the

crew members depend on one another, a microcosm of our

actual circumstances down here on Earth. Perhaps the first

joint interplanetary mission with human crews wil be only a

flyby or orbit of Mars. Earlier, robot vehicles, with

aerobraking, parachutes, and retrorockets, wil have set

gently down on the Martian surface to col ect samples and

return them to Earth, and to emplace supplies for future

explorers. But whether or not we have compel ing, coherent

reasons, I am sure—unless we destroy ourselves first—that

the day wil come when we humans set foot on Mars. It is

only a matter of when.

According to solemn treaty, signed in Washington and

Moscow on January 27, 1967, no nation may lay claim to

part or al of another planet. Nevertheless—for historical

reasons that Columbus would have understood wel —some

people are concerned about who first sets foot on Mars. If

this real y worries us, we can arrange for the ankles of the

crew members to be tied together as they alight in the

gentle Martian gravity.

The crews would acquire new and previously

sequestered samples, in part to search for life, in part to

understand the past and future of Mars and Earth. They

would experiment, for later expeditions, on extracting water,

oxygen, and hydrogen from the rocks and the air and from

the underground permafrost—to drink, to breathe, to power

their machines and, as rocket fuel and oxidizer, to propel

the return voyage. They would test Martian materials for

eventual fabrication of bases and settlements on Mars.

And they would go exploring. When I imagine the early

human exploration of Mars, it's always a roving vehicle, a

little like a jeep, wandering down one of the val ey networks,

the crew with geological hammers, cameras, and analytic

instruments at the ready. They're looking for rocks from

ages past, signs of ancient cataclysms, clues to climate

change, strange chemistries, fossils, or—most exciting and

most unlikely—something alive. Their discoveries are

televised back to Earth at the speed of light. Snuggled up in

bed with the kids, you explore the ancient riverbeds of

Mars.

C H A

P T E R 16

SCALING HEAVEN

Who, my friend,

can

scale

heaven?



—THE EPIC

OF

GILGAMESH



(SUMER,

THIRD

MILLENNIUM

B.C.)

What?, I sometimes ask myself in amazement: Our

ancestors walked from East Africa to Novaya Zemlya and

Ayers Rock and Patagonia, hunted elephants with stone

spearpoints, traversed the polar seas in open boats 7,000

years ago, circumnavigated the Earth propel ed by nothing

but wind, walked the Moon a decade after entering space

—and we're daunted by a voyage to Mars? But then I

remind myself of the avoidable human suffering on Earth,

how a few dol ars can save the life of a child dying of

dehydration, how many children we could save for the cost

of a trip to Mars—and for the moment I change my mind. Is

it unworthy to stay home or unworthy to go? Or have I posed

a false dichotomy? Isn't it possible to make a better life for

everyone on Earth and to reach for the planets and the

stars?

We had an expansive run in the '60s and '70s. You

might have thought, as I did then, that our species would be

on Mars before the century was over. But instead, we've

pul ed inward. Robots aside, we've backed off from the

planets and the stars. 1 keep asking myself Is it a failure of

nerve or a sign of maturity?

Maybe it's the most we could reasonably have

expected. In a way it's amazing that it was possible at al :

We sent a dozen humans on week-long excursions to the

Moon. And we were given the resources to make a

preliminary reconnaissance of the whole Solar System, out

to Neptune anyway—missions that returned a wealth of

data, but nothing of short-term, everyday, bread-on-the-

table practical value. They lifted the human spirit, though.

They enlightened us about our place in the Universe. It's

easy to imagine skeins of historical causality in which there

were no race to the Moon and no planetary program.

But it's also possible to imagine a much more serious

devotion to exploration, because of which we would today

have robot vehicles probing the atmospheres of al the

Jovian planets and dozens of moons, comets, and

asteroids; a network of automatic scientific stations

emplaced on Mars would daily be reporting their findings;

and samples from many worlds would be under

examination in the laboratories of Earth—revealing their

geology, chemistry, and perhaps even their biology. Human

outposts might be already established on the near-Earth

asteroids, the Moon, and Mars.

There were many possible historical paths. Our particular

causality skein has brought us to a modest and

rudimentary, although in many respects heroic, series of

explorations. But it is far interior to what might have been—

and what may one day be.

TO CARRY THE GREEN Promethean spark of Life with us into the

sterile void and ignite there a firestorm of animate matter is

the very destiny of our race," reads the brochure of

something cal ed the First Mil ennial Foundation. It

promises, for $120 a year, "citizenship" in "space colonies

—when the time comes." "Benefactors" who contribute

more also receive "the undying gratitude of a star-flung

civilization, and their name carved on the monolith to be

erected on the Moon." This represents one extreme in the

continuum of enthusiasm for a human presence in space.

The other extreme—better represented in Congress—

questions why we should be in space at al , especial y

people rather than robots. The Apol o program was a

"moondoggle," the social critic Amitai Etzioni once cal ed

it; with the Cold War over, there is no justification whatever,

proponents of this orientation hold, for a manned space

program. Where in this spectrum of policy options should

we be?

Ever since the United States beat the Soviet Union to

the Moon, a coherent, widely understood justification for

humans in space seems to have vanished. Presidents and

Congressional committees puzzle over what to do with the

manned space program. What is it for? Why do we need

it? But the exploits of the astronauts and the moon landings

had elicited—and for good reason—the admiration of the

world. It would be a rejection of that stunning American

achievement, the political leaders tel themselves, to back

off from manned spaceflight. Which President, which

Congress wishes to be responsible for the end of the

American space program? And in the former Soviet Union

a similar argument is heard: Shal we abandon, they ask

themselves, the one remaining high technology in which we

are stil world leaders? Shal we be faithless heirs of

Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Sergei Korolev, and Yuri Gagarin?

The first law of bureaucracy is to guarantee its own

continuance. Left to its own devices, without clear

instructions from above, NASA gradual y devolved into a

program that would maintain profits, jobs, and perquisites.

Pork-barrel politics, with Congress playing a leading role,

became an increasingly powerful force in the design and

execution of missions and long-term goals. The

bureaucracy ossified. NASA lost its way.

On July 20, 1989, the twentieth anniversary of the

Apollo 11 landing on the Moon, President George Bush

announced a long-term direction for the U.S. space

program. Cal ed the Space Exploration Initiative (SEI), it

proposed a sequence of goals including a U.S. space

station, a return of humans to the Moon, and the first landing

of humans on Mars. In a later statement, Mr. Bush set 2019

as the target date for the first footfal on that planet.

And yet the Space Exploration Initiative, despite clear

direction from the top, foundered. Four years after it was

mandated, it did not even have a NASA office dedicated to

it. Smal and inexpensive lunar robotic missions—that

otherwise might wel have been approved—were canceled

by Congress because of guilt by association with SEI.

What went wrong?

One problem was the timescale. SEI extended five or so

presidential terms of office into the future (taking the

average presidency as one and a half terms). That makes it

easy for a president to attempt to commit his successors,

but leaves in considerable doubt how reliable such a

commitment might be. SEI contrasted dramatical y with the

Apol o program—which, it might have been conjectured at

the time it began, could have triumphed when President

Kennedy or his immediate political heir was stil in office.

Second, there was concern about whether NASA, which

had recently experienced great difficulty in safely lifting a

few astronauts 200 miles above the Earth, could send

astronauts on an arcing year-long trajectory to a destination

100 mil ion miles away and bring them back alive.

Third, the program was conceived exclusively in

nationalist terms. Cooperation with other nations was not

fundamental to either design or execution. Vice President

Dan Quayle, who had nominal responsibility for space,

justified the space station as a demonstration that the

United States was "the world's only superpower." But since

the Soviet Union had an operational space station that was

a decade ahead of the United States, Mr. Quayle's

argument proved difficult to fol ow.

Final y, there was the question of where, in terms of

practical politics, the money was supposed to come from.

The costs of getting the first humans to Mars had been

variously estimated, ranging as high as $500 bil ion.

Of course, it's impossible to predict costs before you

have a mission design. And the mission design depends

on such matters as the size of the crew; the extent to which

you take mitigating steps against solar and cosmic

radiation hazards, or zero gravity; and what other risks you

are wil ing to accept with the lives of the men and women

on board. If every crew member has one essential

specialty, what happens if one of them fal s il ? The larger

the crew, the more reliable the backups. You would almost

certainly not send a ful -time oral surgeon, but what

happens if you need root canal work and you're a hundred

mil ion miles from the nearest dentist? Or could it be done

by an endodontist on Earth, using telepresence?

Wernher von Braun was the Nazi-American engineer

who, more than anyone else, actual y took us into space.

His 1952 book Das Marsprojekt envisioned a first mission

with 10 interplanetary spacecraft, 70 crew members, and 3

"landing boats." Redundancy was uppermost in his mind.

The logistical requirements, he wrote, "are no greater than

those for a minor military operation extending over a limited

theater of war." He meant to "explode once and for al the

theory of the solitary space rocket and its little band of bold

interplanetary adventurers," and appealed to Columbus'

three ships without which "history tends to prove that he

might never have returned to Spanish shores." Modern

Mars mission designs have ignored this advice. They are

much less ambitious than yon Braun's, typical y cal ing for

one or two spacecraft crewed by three to eight astronauts,

with another robotic cargo ship or two. The solitary rocket

and the little band of adventurers are stil with us.

Other uncertainties affecting mission design and cost

include whether you pre-emplace supplies from Earth and

launch humans to Mars only after the supplies are safely

landed; whether you can use Martian materials to generate

oxygen to breathe, water to drink, and rocket propel ants to

get home; whether you land using the thin Martian

atmosphere for aerobraking; the degree of redundancy in

equipment thought prudent; the extent to which you use

closed ecological systems or just depend on the food,

water, and waste disposal facilities you've brought from

Earth; the design of roving vehicles for the crew to explore

the Martian landscape; and how much equipment you're

wil ing to carry to test our ability to live off the land in later

voyages.

Until such questions are decided, it's absurd to

accept any figure for the cost of the program. On the

other hand, it was equal y clear that SEI would be

extremely expensive. For al these reasons, the

program was a nonstarter. It was stil born.

There was no effective attempt by the Bush Administration

to spend political capital to get SEI going.

The lesson to me seems clear: There may be no way to

Send humans to Mars in the comparatively near future—

despite the fact that it is entirely within our technological

capability. Governments do not spend these vast sums just

for science, or merely to explore. They need another

purpose, and it must make real political sense.

It may be impossible to go just yet, but when it is

possible, the mission, I think, must be international from the

start, with costs and responsibilities equitably shared and

the expertise of many nations tapped; the price must be

reasonable; the time from approval to launch must fit within

practical political timescales; and the space agencies

concerned must demonstrate their ability to muster

pioneering exploratory missions with human crews safely,

on time, and on budget. If it were possible to imagine such

a mission for less than $100 bil ion, and for a time from

approval to launch less than 15 years, maybe it would be

feasible. (In terms of cost, this would represent only a

fraction of the annual civilian space budgets of the present

spacefaring nations.) With aerobraking and manufacturing

fuel and oxygen for the return trip out of Martian air, it's now

beginning to look as if such a budget and such a timescale

might actual y be realistic.

The cheaper and quicker the mission is, necessarily the

more risk we must be wil ing to take with the lives of the

astronauts and cosmonauts aboard. But as is il ustrated,

among countless examples, by the samurai of medieval

Japan, there are always competent volunteers for highly

dangerous missions in what is perceived as a great cause.

No budget, no timeline can be real y reliable when we

attempt to do something on so grand a scale, something

that has never been done before. The more leeway we ask,

the greater is the cost and the longer it takes to get there.

Finding the right compromise between political feasibility

and mission success may be tricky.

IT'S NOT ENOUGH to go to Mars because some of us have

dreamt of doing so since childhood, or because it seems to

us the obvious long-term exploratory goal for the human

species. If we're talking about spending this much money,

we must justify the expense.

There are now other matters—clear, crying national

needs—that

cannot

be

addressed

without

major

expenditures; at the same time, the discretionary federal

budget has become painful y constrained. Disposal of

chemical and radioactive poisons, energy efficiency,

alternatives to fossil fuels, declining rates of technological

innovation, the col apsing urban infrastructure, the AIDS

epidemic, a witches' brew of cancers, homelessness,

malnutrition, infant mortality, education, jobs, health care—

there is a painful y long list. Ignoring them wil endanger the

wel -being of the nation. A similar dilemma faces al the

spacefaring nations.

Nearly every one of these matters could cost hundreds of

bil ions of dol ars or more to address. Fixing infrastructure

wil cost several tril ion dol ars. Alternatives to the fossil-fuel

economy clearly represent a multitril ion-dol ar investment

worldwide, if we can do it. These projects, we are

sometimes told, are beyond our ability to pay. How then

can we afford to go to Mars?

If there were 20 percent more discretionary funds in the

U.S. federal budget (or the budgets of the other

spacefaring nations), I probably would not feel so conflicted

about advocating sending humans to Mars. If there were 20

percent less, I don't think the most diehard space

enthusiast would be urging such a mission. Surely there is

some point at which the national economy is in such dire

straits that sending people to Mats is unconscionable. The

question is where we draw the line. plainly such a line

exists, and every participant in these debates should

stipulate where that line should be drawn, what fraction of

the gross national product for space is too much. I'd like the

same thing done for "defense."

Public opinion pol s show that many Americans think the

NASA budget is about equal to the defense budget. In fact,

the entire NASA budget, including human and robotic

missions and aeronautics, is about 5 percent of the U.S.

defense budget. How much spending for defense actual y

weakens the country? And even if NASA were cancel ed

altogether, would we free up what is needed to solve our

national problems?

HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT In general—to say nothing of expeditions

to Mars—would be much more readily supportable if, as in

the fifteenth-century arguments of Columbus and Henry the

Navigator, there were a profit lure.[§§§§§§§] Some

arguments have been advanced. The high vacuum or low

gravity or intense radiation environment of near-Earth

space might be utilized, it is said, for commercial benefit.

Al such proposals must be chal enged by this question:

Could comparable or better products be manufactured

down here on Earth if the development money made

available were comparable to what is being poured into the

space program? Judging by how little money corporations

have been wil ing to invest in such technology—apart from

the entities building the rockets and spacecraft themselves

—the prospects, at least at present, seem to be not very

high.

The notion that rare materials might be available

elsewhere is tempered by the fact that freightage is high.

There may, for al we know, be oceans of petroleum on

Titan, but transporting it to Earth wil be expensive.

Platinum-group metals may be abundant in certain

asteroids. If we could move these asteroids into orbit

around the Earth, perhaps we could conveniently mine

them. But at least for the foreseeable future this seems

dangerously imprudent, as I describe later in this book.

In his classic science fiction novel The Man Who Sold

the Moon, Robert Heinlein imagined the profit motive as

the key to space travel. He hadn't foreseen that the Cold

War would sel the Moon. But he did recognize that an

honest profit argument would be difficult to come by.

Heinlein envisioned, therefore, a scam in which the lunar

surface was salted with diamonds so later explorers could

breathlessly discover them and initiate a diamond rush.

We've since returned samples from the Moon, though, and

there is not a hint of commercial y interesting diamonds

there.

However, Kiyoshi Kuramoto and Takafumi Matsui of the

University of Tokyo have studied how the central iron cores

of Earth, Venus, and Mars formed, and find that the Martian

mantle (between crust and core) should be rich in carbon—

richer than that of the Moon or Venus or Earth. Deeper than

300 kilometers, the pressures should transform carbon into

diamond. We know that Mars has been geological y active

over its history. Material from great depth wil occasional y

be extruded up to the surface, and not just in the great

volcanos. So there does seem to be a case for diamonds

on other worlds—on Mars, lied not the Moon. In what

quantities, of what quality and size, and in which locales we

do not yet know.

The return to Earth of a spacecraft stuffed with gorgeous

multicarat diamonds would doubtless depress prices (as

wel as the shareholders of the de Beers and General

Electric corporations). But because of the ornamental and

industrial applications of diamonds, perhaps there is a

lower limit below which prices wil not go. Conceivably, the

affected industries might find cause to promote the early

exploration of Mars.

The idea that Martian diamonds wil pay for

exploring Mars is at best a very long shot, but it's an

example of how rare and valuable substances may be

discoverable on other worlds. It would be foolish,

though, to count on such contingencies. If we seek to

justify missions to other worlds, we'l have to find other

reasons.

BEYOND DISCUSSIONS OF PROFITS and costs, even reduced

costs, we must also describe benefits, if they exist.

Advocates of human missions to Mars must address

whether, in the long term, missions up there are likely to

mitigate any of the problems down here. Consider now the

standard set of justifications and see if you find them valid,

invalid, or indeterminate:

Human missions to Mars would spectacularly improve

our knowledge of the planet, including the search for

present and past life. The program is likely to clarify our

understanding of the environment of our own planet, as

robotic missions have already begun to do. The history of

our civilization shows that the pursuit of basic knowledge is

the way the most significant practical advances come

about. Opinion pol s suggest that the most popular reason

for "exploring space" is "increased knowledge." But are

humans in space essential to achieve this goal? Robotic

missions, given high national priority and equipped with

improved machine intel igence, seem to me entirely

capable of answering, as wel as astronauts can, al the

questions we need to ask—and at Maybe 10 percent the

cost.

It is al eged that "spinoff" wil transpire—huge

technological benefits that would otherwise fail to come

about—thereby

improving

our

international

competitiveness and the domestic economy. But this is an

old argument: Spend $80 bil ion (in contemporary money)

to send Apol o astronauts to the Moon, and we'l throw in a

free stickless frying pan. Plainly, if we're after frying pans,

we can invest the money directly and save almost al of that

$80 bil ion.

The argument is specious for other reasons as wel , one

of which is that DuPont's Teflon technology long antedated

Apol o. The same is true of cardiac pacemakers, bal point

pens, Velcro, and other purported spinoffs of the Apol o

program. (I once had the opportunity to talk with the inventor

of the cardiac pacemaker, who himself nearly had a

coronary accident describing the injustice of what he

perceived as NASA taking credit for his device.) If there

are technologies we urgently need, then spend the money

and develop them. Why go to Mars to do it?

Of course it would be impossible for so much new

technology as NASA requires to be developed and not

have some spil over into the general economy, some

inventions useful down here. For example, the powdered

orange juice substitute Tang was a product of the manned

space program, and spinoffs have occurred in cordless

tools, implanted cardiac defibril ators, liquid-cooled

garments, and digital imaging—to name a few. But they

hardly justify human voyages to Mars or the existence of

NASA.

We could see the old spinoff engine wheezing and

puffing in the waning days of the Reagan-era Star Wars

office. Hydrogen bomb-driven X-ray lasers on orbiting

battle stations wil help perfect laser surgery, they told us.

But if we need laser surgery, if it's a high national priority,

by al means let's al ocate the funds to develop it. just leave

Star Wars out of it. Spinoff justifications constitute an

admission that the program can't stand on its own two feet,

cannot be justified by the purpose for which it was original y

sold.

Once upon a time it was thought, on the basis of

econometric models, that for every dol ar invested in NASA

many dol ars were pumped into the U.S. economy. If this

multiplier effect applied more to NASA than to most

government agencies, it would provide a potent fiscal and

social justification for the space program. NASA

supporters were not shy about appealing to this argument.

But a 1994 Congressional Budget Office study found it to

be a delusion. While NASA spending benefits some

production segments of the U.S. economy—especial y the

aerospace industry—there is no preferential multiplier

effect. Likewise, while NASA spending certainly creates or

maintains jobs and profits, it does so no more efficiently

than many other government agencies.

Then there's education, an argument that has proved

from time to time very attractive in the White House.

Doctorates in science peaked somewhere around the time

of Apollo 11, maybe even with the proper phase lag after

the start of the Apol o program. The cause-and-effect

relationship is perhaps undemonstrated, although not

implausible. But so what? If we're interested in improving

education, is going to Mars the best route? Think of what

we could do with $100 bil ion for teacher training and

salaries, school laboratories and libraries, scholarships for

disadvantaged students, research facilities, and graduate

fel owships. Is it real y true that the best way to promote

science education is to go to Mars?

Another argument is that human missions to Mars wil

occupy the military-industrial complex, diffusing the

temptation to use its considerable political muscle to

exaggerate external threats and pump up defense funding.

The other side of this particular coin is that by going to

Mars we maintain a standby technological capacity that

might be important for future military contingencies. Of

course, we might simply ask those guys to do something

directly useful for the civilian economy. But as we saw in the

1970s with Grumman buses and Boeing/Vertol commuter

trains, the aerospace industry experiences real difficulty in

producing competitively for the civilian economy. Certainly

a tank may travel 1,000 miles a year and a bus 1,000 miles

a week, so the basic designs must be different. But on

matters of reliability at least, the Defense Department

seems to be much less demanding.

Cooperation in space, as I've already mentioned, is

becoming an instrument of international cooperation—for

example, in slowing the proliferation of strategic weapons

to new nations. Rockets decommissioned because of the

end of the Cold War might be gainful y employed in

missions to Earth orbit, the Moon, the planets, asteroids,

and comets. But al this can be accomplished without

human missions to Mars.

Other justifications are offered. It is argued that the

ultimate solution to world energy problems is to strip-mine

the Moon, return the solar-wind-implanted helium-3 back to

Earth, and use it in fusion reactors. What fusion reactors?

Even if this were possible, even if it were cost-effective, it is

a technology 50 or 100 years away. Our energy problems

need to be solved at a less leisurely pace.

Even stranger is the argument that we have to send

human beings into space in order to solve the world

population crisis. But some 250,000 more people are born

than die every day—

which means cans that we would have to launch 250,000

people per day into space to maintain world population at

its present levels. This appears to be beyond our present

capability.

I RUN THROUGH such a list and try to add up the pros and

cons, bearing in mind the other urgent claims on the federal

budget. To me, the argument so far comes down to this

question: Can the sum of a large number of individual y

inadequate Justifications add up to an adequate

justification?

I don't think any of the items on my list of purported

justifications is demonstrably worth $500 bil ion or even

$100 bil ion, certainly not in the short term. On the other

hand, most of them are worth something, and if I have five

items each worth $20 bil ion, maybe it adds up to $100

bil ion. If we can be clever about reducing costs and making

true international partnerships, the justifications become

more compel ing.

Until a national debate on this topic has transpired,

until we have a better idea of the rationale and the

cost/benefit ratio of human missions to Mars, what should

we do? My suggestion is that we pursue research and

development projects that can be justified on their own

merits or by their relevance to other goals, but that can also

contribute to human missions to Mars should we later

decide to go. Such an agenda would include:

• U.S. astronauts on the Russian space station

Mir for joint flights of gradual y increasing

duration, aiming at one to two years, the Mars

flight time.

• Configuration of the international space station

so its principal function is to study the

long-term effects of the space environment on

humans.

• Early implementation of a rotating or tethered

"artificial gravity" module on the

international space station, for other animals

and then for humans.

• Enhanced studies of the Sun, including a

distributed set of robot probes in orbit about the

Sun, to monitor solar activity and give the

earliest possible warning to astronauts of

hazardous "solar flares"—mass ejections of

electrons and protons from the Sun's corona.

• U.S./Russian and multilateral development of

Energiya and Proton rocket technology for

the U.S. and international space programs.

Although the United States is unlikely to depend

primarily on a Soviet booster, Energiya has

roughly the lift of the Saturn V that sent the Apol o

astronauts to the Moon. The United States let the

Saturn V assembly line die, and it cannot readily

be resuscitated. Proton is the most reliable large

booster now in service. Russia is eager to sel this

technology for hard currency.

• Joint projects with NASDA (the Japanese

space agency) and Tokyo University, the

European Space Agency, and the Russian Space

Agency, along with Canada and other nations. In

most cases these should be equal partnerships,

not the United States insisting on cal ing the shots.

For the robotic exploration of Mars, such

programs are already under way. For human

flight, the chief such activity is clearly the

international space station. Eventual y, we might

muster joint simulated planetary missions in low

Earth orbit. One of the principal objectives of

these programs should be to build a tradition of

cooperative technical excel ence.

• Technological development—using state-of-the-

art robotics and artificial intel igence—

of rovers, bal oons, and aircraft for the exploration

of Mars, and implementation of the first

international return sample mission. Robotic

spacecraft that can return samples from Mars can

be tested on near-Earth asteroids and the Moon.

Samples returned from careful y selected regions

of the Moon can have their ages determined and

contribute in a fundamental way to our

understanding of the early history of the Earth.

• Further development of technologies to

manufacture fuel and oxidizer out of Martian

materials. In one estimate, based on a prototype

instrument designed by Robert Zubrin and

col eagues at the Martin Marietta Corporation,

several kilograms of Martian soil can be

automatical y returned to Earth using a modest

and reliable Delta launch vehicle, al for no more

than a song (comparatively speaking).

• Simulations on Earth of long-duration trips to Mars,

concentrating on potential social

and psychological problems.

• Vigorous pursuit of new technologies such as

constant-thrust propulsion to get us to

Mars quickly; this may be essential if the radiation

or microgravity hazards make one-

year (or longer) flight times too risky.

• Intensive study of near-Earth asteroids, which may

provide superior intermediate-

timescale objectives for human exploration than

does the Moon.

• A greater emphasis on science—including the

fundamental sciences behind space

exploration, and the thorough analysis of data

already obtained—by NASA and other space

agencies.

These recommendations add up to a fraction of the ful

cost of a human mission to Mars and—spread out over a

decade or so and done jointly with other nations—a fraction

of current space budgets. But, if implemented, they would

help us to make accurate cost estimates and better

assessment of the dangers and benefits. They would

permit us to maintain vigorous progress toward human

expeditions to Mars without premature commitment to any

specific mission hardware. Most, perhaps al , of these

recommendations have other justifications, even if We

were sure wed be unable to send humans to any other

world in the next few decades. And a steady drumbeat of

accomplishments increasing the feasibility of human

voyages to Mars would—in the minds of many at least—

combat widespread pessimism about the future.





THERE'S SOMETHING MORE. There's a set of less tangible

arguments, many of which, I freely admit, I find attractive

and resonant. Spaceflight speaks to something deep

inside us—many of us, if not al . An emerging cosmic

perspective, an improved understanding of our place in the

Universe, a highly visible program affecting our view of

ourselves might clarify the fragility of our planetary

environment and the common peril and responsibility of al

the nations and peoples of Earth. And human missions to

Mars would provide hopeful prospects, rich in adventure,

for the wanderers among us, especial y the young. Even

vicarious exploration has social utility.

I repeatedly find that when I give talks on the future of the

space program—to universities, business and military

groups, professional organizations—the audiences are

much less patient with practical, real-world political and

economic obstacles than 1. They long to sweep away the

impediments, to recapture the glory days of Vostok and

Apol o, to get on with it and once more tread other worlds.

We did it before; we can do it again, they say. But, I caution

myself, those who attend such talks are self-selected space

enthusiasts.

In 1969, less than half the American people thought the

Apol o program was worth the cost. But on the twenty-fifth

anniversary of the Moon landing, the number had risen to

two thirds. Despite its problems, NASA was rated as doing

a good-to-excel ent job by 63 percent of Americans. With

no reference to cost, 75 percent of Americans (according

to a CBS News pol ) favored "the United States sending

astronauts to explore Mars.' For young adults, the figure

was 68 percent. I think "explore" is the operative word.

It is no accident that, whatever their human flaws, and

how ever moribund the human space program has become

(a trend that the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission

may have helped to reverse), astronauts and cosmonauts

are stil widely regarded as heroes of our species. A

scientific col eague tel s me about a recent trip to the New

Guinea highlands where she visited a stone age culture

hardly contacted by Western civilization. They were

ignorant of wristwatches, soft drinks, and frozen food. But

they knew about Apol o 11. They knew that humans had

walked on the Moon. They knew the names of Armstrong

and Aldrin and Col ins. They wanted to know who was

visiting the Moon these days.

Projects that are future-oriented, that, despite their

political difficulties, can be completed only in some distant

decade are continuing reminders that there wil be a future.

Winning a foothold on other worlds whispers in our ears

that we're more than Picts or Serbs or Tongans: We're

humans.

Exploratory spaceflight puts scientific ideas, scientific

thinking, and scientific vocabulary in the public eye. It

elevates the general level of intel ectual inquiry. The idea

that we've now understood something never grasped by

anyone who ever lived before—that exhilaration, especial y

intense for the scientists involved, but perceptible to nearly

everyone—propagates through the society, bounces off

wal s, and comes back at us. It encourages us to address

problems in other fields that have also never before been

solved. It increases the general sense of optimism in the

society. It gives currency to critical thinking of the sort

urgently needed if we are to solve hitherto intractable social

issues. It helps stimulate a new generation of scientists.

The more science in the media-especial y if methods are

described, as wel as conclusions and implications-the

healthier, I believe, the society is. People everywhere

hunger to understand.

WHEN I WAS A CHILD , my most exultant dreams were about

flying—not in some machine, but al by myself. I would be

skipping or hopping, and slowly I could pul my trajectory

higher. It would take longer to fal back to the ground. Soon I

would be on such a high arc that I wouldn't come down at

al . I would alight like a gargoyle in a niche near the pinnacle

of a skyscraper, or gently settle down on a cloud. In the

dream—which I must have had in its many variations at

least a hundred times—achieving flight required a certain

cast of mind. It's impossible to describe it in words, but I

can remember what it was like to this day. You did

something inside your head and at the pit of your stomach,

and then you could lift yourself up by an effort of wil alone,

your limbs hanging limply. Off you'd soar.

I know many people have had similar dreams. Maybe

most people. Maybe everyone. Perhaps it goes back 10

mil ion years or more, when our ancestors were graceful y

flinging themselves from branch to branch in the primeval

forest. A wish to soar like the birds motivated many of the

pioneers of flight, including Leonardo da Vinci and the

Wright brothers. Maybe that's part of the appeal of

spaceflight, too.

In orbit about any world, or in interplanetary flight, you are

literal y weightless. You can propel yourself to the

spacecraft ceiling with a slight push off the floor. You can go

tumbling through the air down the long axis of the

spacecraft. Humans experience weightlessness as joy; this

has been reported by almost every astronaut and

cosmonaut. But because spacecraft are stil so smal , and

because space "walks" have been done with extreme

caution, no human has yet enjoyed this wonder and glory:

propel ing yourself by an almost imperceptible push, with no

machinery driving you, untethered, high up into the sky, into

the blackness of interplanetary space. You become a living

satel ite of the Earth, or a human planet of the Sun.

Planetary exploration satisfies our inclination for great

enterprises and wanderings and quests that has been with

us since our days as hunters and gatherers on the East

African savannahs a mil ion years ago. By chance—it is

possible, I say, to imagine many skeins of historical

causality in which this would not have transpired—in our

age we are able to begin again.

Exploring other worlds employs precisely the same

qualities of daring, planning, cooperative enterprise, and

valor that mark the finest in the military tradition. Never mind

the night launch of an Apol o spacecraft bound for another

world. That makes the conclusion foregone. Witness mere

F-14s taking off from adjacent flight decks, graceful y

canting left and right, afterburners flaming, and there's

something that sweeps you away—or at least it does me.

And no amount of knowledge of the potential abuses of

carrier task forces can affect the depth of that feeling. It

simply speaks to another part of me. It doesn't want

recriminations or politics. It just wants to fly.

"I . . . had ambition not only to go farther than anyone

had done before," wrote Captain James Cook, the

eighteenth-century explorer of the Pacific, "but as far

as it was possible for man to go." Two centuries later,

Yuri Romanenko, on returning to Earth after what was

then the longest space flight in history, said "The

Cosmos is a magnet . . . Once you've been there, al

you can think of is how to get back."

Even Jean-Jacques Rousseau, no enthusiast of

technology, felt it:

The stars are far above us; we need preliminary instruction,

instruments and machines, which are like so many immense

ladders enabling us to approach them and bring them within

our grasp.

"The future possibilities of space-travel," wrote the

philosopher Bertrand Russel in 1959,

which are now left mainly to unfounded fantasy, could be more

soberly treated without ceasing to be interesting and could

show to even the most adventurous of the young that a world

without war need not be a world without adventurous and

hazardous glory.[********] To this kind of contest there is

no limit. Each victory is only a prelude to another, and no

boundaries can be set to rational hope.

In the long run, these—more than any of the "practical"

justifications considered earlier—may be the reasons we

wil go to Mars and other worlds. In the meantime, the most

important step we can take toward Mars is to make

significant progress on Earth. Even modest improvements

in the social, economic, and political problems that our

global civilization now faces could release enormous

resources, both material and human, for other goals.

There's plenty of housework to be done here on Earth,

and our commitment to it must be steadfast. But we're the

kind of species that needs a frontier—for fundamental

biological reasons.

Every time humanity stretches itself and turns a new corner,

it receives a jolt of productive vitality that can carry it for

centuries.

There's a new world next door. And we know how to

get there.

C H A P T E R 17

ROUTINE

INTERPLANETARY

VIOLENCE

It is a law of nature that Earth and all

other bodies should remain in

their proper places and be

moved from them only by violence.

—

ARISTOTLE

(384-322

B.C.),

PHYSICS

There was something funny about Saturn. When, in 1610,

Galileo used the world's first astronomical telescope to

view the planet—then the most distant world known—he

found two appendages, one on either side. He likened

them to "handles." Other astronomers cal ed them "ears."

The Cosmos holds many wonders, but a planet with jug

ears is dismaying. Galileo went to his grave with this

bizarre matter unresolved.

As the years passed, observers found the ears . . .

Wel , waxing and waning. Eventual y, it became clear that

what Galileo had discovered was an extremely thin ring that

surrounds Saturn at its equator but touches it nowhere. In

some years, because of the changing orbital positions of

Earth and Saturn, the ring had been seen edge-on and,

because of its thinness, it seemed to disappear. In other

years, it had been viewed more face-oil, and the "ears"

grew bigger. But what does it mean that there's a ring

around Saturn? A thin, flat, solid plate with a hole cut out for

the planet to fit into? Where does that come from?

This line of inquiry wil shortly take us to world-

shattering col isions, to two quite different perils for our

species, and to a reason—beyond those already

described—that we must, for our very survival, be out there

among the planets.

We now know that the rings (emphatical y plural) of

Saturn are a vast horde of tiny ice worlds, each on its

separate orbit, each bound to Saturn by the giant planet's

gravity. In size, these worldlets range from particles of fine

dust to houses. None is big enough to photograph even

from close flybys. Spaced out in an exquisite set of fine

concentric circles, something like the grooves on a

phonograph record (which in reality make, of course, a

spiral), the rings were first revealed in their true majesty by

the two Voyager spacecraft in their 1980/81 flybys. In our

century, the Art Deco rings of Saturn have become an icon

of the future.

At a scientific meeting in the late 1960s, I was

asked to summarize the outstanding problems in planetary

science. One, I suggested, was the question of why, of al

the planets, only Saturn had rings. This, Voyager

discovered, is a nonquestion. All four giant planets in our

Solar System— Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune—in

fact have rings. But no one knew it then.

Each ring system has distinctive features. Jupiter's is

tenuous and made mainly of dark, very smal particles. The

bright rings of Saturn are composed mainly of frozen water;

there are thousands of separate rings here, some twisted,

with strange, dusky, spoke-like markings forming and

dissipating. The dark rings of Uranus seem to be

composed of elemental carbon and organic molecules—

something like charcoal or chimney soot; Uranus has nine

main rings, a few of which sometime seem to "breathe,"

expanding and contracting. Neptune's rings are the most

tenuous of al , varying so much in thickness that, when

detected from Earth, they appear only as arcs and

incomplete circles. A number of rings seem to be

maintained by the gravitational tugs of two shepherd

moons, one a little nearer and the other a little farther from

the planet than the ring. Each ring system displays its own,

appropriately unearthly, beauty.

How do rings form? One possibility is tides: If an errant

world passes close to a planet, the interloper's near side is

gravitational y pul ed toward the planet more than its far

side; if it comes close enough, if its internal cohesion is low

enough, it can be literal y torn to pieces. Occasional y we

see this happening to comets as they pass too close to

Jupiter, or the Sun. Another possibility, emerging from the

Voyager reconnaissance of the outer Solar System, is this:

Rings are made when worlds col ide and moons are

smashed to smithereens. Both mechanisms may have

played a role.

The space between the planets is traversed by an odd

col ection of rogue worldlets, each in orbit about the Sun. A

few are as big as a county or even a state; many more have

surface areas like those of a vil age or a town. More little

ones are found than big ones, and they range in size down

to particles of dust. Some of them travel on long, stretched-

out el iptical paths, which make them periodical y cross the

orbit of one or more planets.

Occasional y, unluckily, there's a world in the way. The

col ision can shatter and pulverize both the interloper and

the moon that's hit (or at least the region around ground

zero). The resulting debris—ejected from the moon but not

so fast-moving as to escape from the planet's gravity—may

form, for a time, a new ring. It's made of whatever the

col iding bodies were made of, but usual y more of the

target moon than the rogue impactor. If the col iding worlds

are icy, the net result wil be rings of ice particles; if they're

made of organic molecules, the result wil be rings of

organic particles (which wil slowly be processed by

radiation into carbon). Al the mass in the rings of Saturn is

no more than 'would result from the complete impact

pulverization of a single icy moon. The disintegration of

smal moons can likewise account for the ring systems of

the three other giant planets.

Unless it's very close to its planet, a shattered moon

gradual y reaccumulates (or at least a fair fraction of it

does). The pieces, big and smal , stil in approximately the

same orbit as the moon was before the impact, fal together

helter-skelter. What used to be a piece of the core is now at

the surface, and vice versa. The resulting hodgepodge

surfaces might seem very odd. Miranda, one of the moons

of Uranus, looks disconcertingly jumbled and may have had

such an origin.

The American planetary geologist Eugene Shoemaker

proposes that many moons in the outer Solar System have

been annihilated and reformed—not just once but several

times each over the 4.5 bil ion years since the Sun and the

planets condensed out of interstel ar gas and dust. The

picture emerging from the Voyager reconnaissance of the

outer Solar System is of worlds whose placid and lonely

vigils are spasmodical y troubled by interlopers from space;

of world-shattering col isions; and of moons re-forming from

debris, reconstituting themselves like phoenixes from their

own ashes.

But a moon that lives very close to a planet cannot re-

form if it is pulverized—the gravitational tides of the nearby

planet prevent it. The resulting debris, once spread out into

a ring system, might be very long-lived—at least by the

standard of a human lifetime. Perhaps many of the smal ,

inconspicuous moons now orbiting the giant planets wil

one day blossom forth into vast and lovely rings.

These ideas are supported by the appearance of a

number of satel ites in the Solar System. Phobos, the inner

moon of Mars, has a large crater named Stickney; Mimas,

an inner moon of Saturn, has a big one named Herschel.

These craters—like those on our own Moon and, indeed,

throughout the Solar System—are produced by col isions.

An interloper smashes into a bigger world and makes an

immense explosion at the point of impact, A bowl-shaped

crater is excavated, and the smal er impacting object is

destroyed. If the interlopers that dug out the Stickney and

Herschel craters had been only a little larger, they would

have had enough energy to blow Phobos and Mimas to

bits. These moons barely escaped the cosmic wrecking

bal . Many others did not.

Every time a world is smashed into, there's one less

interloper—something like a demolition derby on the

scale of the Solar System, a war of attrition. The very

fact that many such col isions have occurred means

that the rogue worldlets have been largely used up.

Those on circular trajectories around the Sun, those

that don't intersect the orbits of other worlds, wil be

unlikely to smash into a planet. Those on highly

el iptical trajectories, those that cross the orbits of

other planets, Wil sooner or later col ide or, by a near

miss, be gravitational y ejected from the Solar System.

The planets almost certainly accumulated from

worldlets which in turn had condensed out of a great

flat cloud of gas and dust Surrounding the Sun—the

sort of cloud that can now be seen around young

nearby stars. So, in the early history of the solar

System before col isions cleaned things up, there

should have been many more worldlets than we see

today.

Indeed, there is clear evidence for this in our own

backyard: If we count up the interloper worldlets in our

neighborhood in space, we can estimate how often they'l

hit the Moon. Let us make the very modest assumption that

the population of interlopers has never been smal er than it

is today. We can then calculate how many craters there

should be on the Moon. The number we figure turns out to

be much less than the number we see on the Moon's

ravaged highlands. The unexpected profusion of craters on

the Moon speaks to us of an earlier epoch when the Solar

System was in wild turmoil, churning with worlds on col ision

trajectories. This makes good sense, because they formed

from the aggregation of much smal er worldlets—which

themselves had grown out of interstel ar dust. Four bil ion

years ago, the lunar impacts were hundreds of times more

frequent than they are today; and 4.5 bil ion years ago,

when the planets were stil incomplete, col isions happened

perhaps a bil ion times more often than in our becalmed

epoch.

The chaos may have been relieved by much more

flamboyant ring systems than grace the planets today. If

they had smal moons in that time, the Earth, Mars, and the

other smal planets may also have been adorned with rings.

The most satisfactory explanation of the origin of our own

Moon, based on its chemistry (as revealed by samples

returned from the Apollo missions), is that it was formed

almost 4.5 bil ion years ago, when a world the size of Mars

struck the Earth. Much of our planet's rocky mantle was

reduced to dust and hot gas and blasted into space. Some

of the debris, in o:-bit around the Earth, then gradual y

reaccumulated—atom by atom, boulder by boulder. If that

unknown impacting world had been only a little larger, the

result would have been the obliteration of the Earth.

Perhaps there once were other worlds in our Solar System

—perhaps even worlds on which life was stirring—hit by

some demon worldlet, utterly demolished, and of which

today we have not even an intimation.

The emerging picture of the early Solar System does not

resemble a stately progression of events designed to form

the Earth. Instead, it looks as if our planet was made, and

survived, by mere lucky chance,[††††††††] amid

unbelievable violence. Our world does not seem to have

been sculpted by a master craftsman. Here too, there is no

hint of a Universe made for us.

THE DWINDLING SUPPLY of worldlets is today variously labeled:

asteroids, comets, smal moons. But these are arbitrary

categories—real worldlets are able to breach these human-

made partitions. Some asteroids (the word means

"starlike," which they certainly are not) are rocky, others

metal ic, stil others rich in organic matter. None is bigger

than 1,000 kilometers across. They are found mainly in a

belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Astronomers

once thought the "main-belt" asteroids were the remains of

a demolished world, but, as I've been describing, another

idea is now more fashionable: The Solar System was once

fil ed with asteroid-like worlds, some of which went into

building the planets. Only in the asteroid belt, near Jupiter,

did the gravitational tides of this most massive planet

prevent the nearby debris from coalescing into a new world.

The asteroids, instead of representing a world that once

was, seem to be the building blocks of a world destined

never to be.

Down to kilometer size, there may be several mil ion

asteroids, but, in the enormous volume of interplanetary

space, even that's stil far too few to cause any serious

hazard to spacecraft on their way to the outer Solar

System. The first main-belt asteroids, Gaspra and Ida,

were photographed, in 1991 and 1993 respectively, by the

Galileo spacecraft on its tortuous journey to Jupiter.

Main-belt asteroids mostly stay at home. To investigate

them. we must go and visit them, as Galileo did. Comets,

on the other hand, sometimes come and visit us, as

Hal ey's Comet did most recently in 1910 and 1986.

Comets are made mainly of ice, plus smal er amounts of

rocky and organic material. When heated, the ice

vaporizes, forming the long and lovely tails blown outward

by the solar wind and the pressure of sunlight. After many

passages by the Sun, the ice is al evaporated, sometimes

leaving a dead rocky and organic world. Sometimes the

remaining particles, the ice that held them together now

gone, spread out in the comet's orbit, generating a debris

trail around the Sun.

Every time a bit of cometary fluff the size of a grain of

sand enters the Earth's atmosphere at high speed, it burns

up, producing a momentary trail of light that Earthbound

observers cal a sporadic meteor or "shooting star." Some

disintegrating comets have orbits that cross the Earth's. So

every year, the Earth, on its steady circumnavigation of the

Sun, also plunges through belts of orbiting cometary debris.

We may then witness a meteor shower, or even a meteor

storm—the skies ablaze with the body parts of a comet.

For example, the Perseid meteors, seen on or about

August 12 of each year, originate in a dying comet cal ed

Swift-Tuttle. But the beauty of a meteor shower should not

deceive us: There is a continuum that connects these

shimmering visitors to our night skies with the destruction of

worlds.

A few asteroids now and then give off little puffs of gas or

even form a temporary tail, suggesting that they are in

transition between cometdom and asteroidhood. Some

smal moons going around the planets are probably

captured asteroids or comets; the moons of Mars and the

outer satel ites of Jupiter may be in this category.

Gravity smooths down everything that sticks out too far.

But only in large bodies is the gravity enough to make

mountains and other projections col apse of their own

weight, rounding the world. And, indeed, when we observe

their shapes, almost always we find that smal worldlets are

lumpy, irregular, potato-shaped.

THERE ARE ASTRONOMERS whose idea of a good time is to

stay up til dawn on a cold, moonless night taking pictures

of the sky—the same sky they photographed the year

before . . . and the year before that. If they got it right last

time, you might wel ask, why are they doing it again? The

answer is: The sky changes. In any given year there might

be worldlets whol y unknown, never seen before, that

approach the Earth and are spied by these dedicated

observers.

On March 25, 1993, a group of asteroid and comet

hunters, looking at the photographic harvest from an

intermittently cloudy night at Mount Palomar in California,

discovered a faint elongated smudge on their films. It was

near a very bright object in the sky, the planet Jupiter.

Carolyn and Eugene Shoemaker and David Levy then

asked other observers to take a look. The smudge turned

out to be something astonishing: some twenty smal , bright

objects orbiting Jupiter, one behind the other, like pearls on

a string. Col ectively they are cal ed Comet Shoemaker-

Levy 9 (this is the ninth time that these col aborators have

together discovered a periodic comet).

But cal ing these objects a comet is confusing. There

was a horde of them, probably the fragmented remains of a

single, hitherto undiscovered, comet. It silently orbited the

Sun for 4 bil ion years before passing too close to Jupiter

and being captured, a few decades ago, by the gravity of

the Solar System's largest planet. On July 7, 1992, it was

torn apart by Jupiter's gravitational tides.

You can recognize that the inner part of such a comet

would be pul ed toward Jupiter a little more strongly than the

outer part, because the inner part is closer to Jupiter than

the outer part. The difference in pul is certainly smal . Our

feet are a little closer to the center of the Earth than our

heads, but we are not in consequence torn to pieces by the

Earth's gravity. For such tidal disruption to have occurred,

the original comet must have been held together very

weakly. Before fragmentation, it was, we think, a loosely

consolidated mass of ice, rock, and organic matter, maybe

10 kilometers (about 6 miles) across.

The orbit of this disrupted comet was then determined to

high precision. Between July 16 and 22, 1994, al the

cometary fragments, one after another, col ided with

Jupiter. The biggest pieces seem to have been a few

kilometers across. Their impacts with Jupiter were

spectacular.

No one knew beforehand what these multiple impacts

into the atmosphere and clouds of Jupiter would do.

Perhaps the cometary fragments, surrounded by halos of

dust, were much smal er than they seemed. Or perhaps

they were not coherent bodies at al , but loosely

consolidated—something like a heap of gravel with al the

particles traveling through space together, in nearly

identical orbits. If either of these possibilities were true

Jupiter might swal ow the comets without a trace. Other

astronomers thought there would at least be bright firebal s

and giant plumes as the cometary fragments plunged into

the atmosphere. Stil others suggested that the dense cloud

of fine particles accompanying the fragments of Comet

Shoemaker-Levy 9 into Jupiter would disrupt the

magnetosphere of Jupiter or form a new ring.

A comet this size should impact Jupiter, it is calculated,

only once every thousand years. It's the astronomical event

not of one lifetime, but of a dozen. Nothing on this scale has

occurred since the invention of the telescope. So in mid

July 1994, in a beautiful y coordinated international

scientific effort, telescopes al over the Earth and in space

turned towards Jupiter.

Astronomers had over a year to prepare. The trajectories

of the fragments in their orbits around Jupiter were

estimated. It was discovered that they would al hit Jupiter.

Predictions of the timing were refined. Disappointingly, the

calculations revealed that al impacts would occur on the

night side of Jupiter, the side invisible from the Earth

(although

accessible

to

the Ga l i l e o a n d Voyager

spacecraft in the outer Solar System). But, happily, al

impacts would occur only a few minutes before the Jovian

dawn, before the impact site would be carried by Jupiter's

rotation into the line of sight from Earth.

The appointed moment for the impact of the first piece,

Fragment A, came and went. There were no reports from

ground-based telescopes. Planetary scientists stared with

increasing gloom at a television monitor displaying the data

transmitted to the Space Telescope Science Institute in

Baltimore from the Hubble Space Telescope. There was

nothing anomalous Shuttle astronauts took time off from the

reproduction of fruit flies, fish, and newts to look at Jupiter

through binoculars. They reported seeing nothing. The

impact of the mil ennium was beginning to look very much

like a fizzle.

Then there was a report from a ground-based optical

telescope in La Palma in the Canary Islands, fol owed by

announcements from a radiotelescope in Japan; from the

European Southern Observatory in Chile; and from a

University of Chicago instrument in the frigid wastelands of

the South Pole. In Baltimore the young scientists crowding

around the TV monitor—themselves monitored by the

cameras of CNN—began to see something, and in exactly

the right place on Jupiter. You could witness consternation

turn into puzzlement, and then exultation. They cheered;

they screamed; they jumped up and down. Smiles fil ed the

room. They broke out the champagne. Here was a group of

young American scientists—about a third of them, including

the team leader, Heidi Hammel, women—and you could

imagine youngsters al over the world thinking that it might

be fun to be a scientist, that this might be a good daytime

job, or even a means to spiritual fulfil ment.

For many of the fragments, observers somewhere on

Earth noticed the firebal rise so quickly and so high that it

could be seen even though the impact site below it was stil

in Jovian darkness. Plumes ascended and then flattened

into pancake-like forms. Spreading out from the point of

impact we could see sound and gravity waves, and a patch

of discoloration that for the largest fragments became as

big as the Earth.

Slamming into Jupiter at 60 kilometers a second

(130,000 miles an hour), the large fragments converted

their kinetic energy partly into shock waves, partly into heat.

The temperature in the firebal was estimated at thousands

of degrees. Some of the firebal s and plumes were far

brighter than al the rest of Jupiter put together.

What is the cause of the dark stains left after the impact?

It might be stuff from the deep clouds of Jupiter-from the

region to which ground-based observers cannot ordinarily

see-that wel ed up and spread out. However, the fragments

do not seem to have penetrated to such depths. Or the

molecules responsible for the stains might have been in the

cometary fragments in the first place. We know from the

Vega 1 and 2 Soviet missions and the Giotto mission of

the European Space Agency—both to Hal ey's Comet—

that comets may be as much as a quarter composed of

complex organic molecules. They are the reason that the

nucleus of Hal ey's Comet is pitch black. If some of the

cometary organics survived the impact events, they may

have been responsible for the stain. Or, final y, the stain

may be due to organic matter not delivered by the

impacting cometary fragments, but synthesized by their

shock waves from the atmosphere of Jupiter.

Impact of the fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9

with Jupiter was witnessed on seven continents. Even

amateur astronomers with smal telescopes could see the

plumes and the subsequent discoloration of the Jovian

clouds. Just as sporting events are covered at al angles by

television cameras on the field and from a dirigible high

overhead, six NASA spacecraft deployed throughout the

Solar System, with different observational specialties,

recorded this new wonder—the Hubble Space Telescope ,

t h e International Ultraviolet Explorer, and the Extreme

Ultraviolet Explorer al in Earth orbit; Ulysses, taking time

out from it investigation of the South Pole of the Sun;

Galileo, on the way to its own rendezvous with Jupiter; and

Voyager 2, far beyond Neptune on its way to the stars. As

the data are accumulated and analyzed, our knowledge of

comets, of Jupiter, and of the violent col isions of worlds

should al be substantial y improved.

For many scientists—but especial y for Carolyn and

Eugene Shoemaker and David Levy—there was

something poignant about the cometary fragments, one

after the other, making their death plunges into Jupiter.

They had lived with this comet, in a manner of speaking, for

16 months, watched it split, the pieces, enshrouded by

clouds of dust, playing hide-and-seek and spreading out in

their orbits. In a limited way, each fragment had its own

personality. Now they're al gone, ablated into molecules

and atoms in the upper atmosphere of the Solar System's

largest planet. In a way, we almost mourn them. But we're

learning from their fiery deaths. It is perhaps some

reassurance to know that there are a hundred tril ion more

of them in the Sun's vast treasure-house of worlds.

THERE ARE ABOUT 200 known asteroids whose paths take

them near the Earth. They are cal ed, appropriately enough,

"near-Earth" asteroids. Their detailed appearance (like that

of their main-belt cousins) immediately implies that they are

the products of a violent col isional history. Many of them

may be the shards and remnants of once-larger worldlets.

With a few exceptions, the near-Earth asteroids are only

a few kilometers across or smal er, and take one to a few

years to make a circuit around the Sun. About 20 percent of

them, sooner or later, are bound to hit the Earth—with

devastating consequences. (But in astronomy, "sooner or

later" can encompass bil ions of years.) Cicero's assurance

that "nothing of chance or hazard" is to be found in an

absolutely ordered and regular heaven is a profound

misperception. Even today, as Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9's

encounter with Jupiter reminds us, there is routine

interplanetary violence, although not on the scale that

marked the early history of the Solar System.

Like main-belt asteroids, many near-Earth asteroids are

rocky. A few are mainly metal, and it has been suggested

that enormous rewards might attend moving such an

asteroid into orbit around the Earth, and then systematical y

mining it—a mountain of high-grade ore a few hundred

miles overhead. The value of platinum-group metals alone

in a single such world has been estimated as many tril ions

of dol ars—although the unit price would plummet

spectacularly if such materials became widely available.

Methods of extracting metals and minerals from

appropriate asteroids are being studied, for example by

John Lewis, a planetary scientist at the University of

Arizona.

Some near-Earth asteroids are rich in organic matter,

apparently preserved from the very earliest Solar System.

Some have been found, by Steven Ostro of the Jet

Propulsion Laboratory, to be double, two bodies in contact.

Perhaps a larger world has broken in two as it passed

through the strong gravitational tides of a planet like Jupiter;

more interesting is the possibility that two worlds on similar

orbits made a gentle overtaking col ision and stuck. This

process may have been key to the building of planets and

the Earth. At least one asteroid (Ida, as viewed by Galileo)

has its own smal moon. We might guess that two asteroids

in contact and two asteroids orbiting one another have

related origins.

Sometimes, we hear about an asteroid making a "near

miss." (Why do we cal it a "near miss"? A "near hit" is what

we real y mean.) But then we read a little more careful y,

and it turns out that its closest approach to the Earth was

several hundreds of thousands or mil ions of kilometers.

That doesn't count—that's too far away, farther even than

the Moon. If we had an inventory of al the near-Earth

asteroids, including those considerably smal er than a

kilometer across, we could project their orbits into the future

and predict which ones are potential y dangerous. There

are an estimated 2,000 of them bigger than a kilometer

across, of which we have actual y observed only a few

percent. There are maybe 200,000 bigger than 100 meters

in diameter.

The near-Earth asteroids have evocative mythological

names: Orpheus, Hathor, Icarus, Adonis, Apol o, Cerberus,

Khufu, Amor, Tantalus, Aten, Midas, Ra-Shalom, Phaethon,

Toutatis, Quetzalcoatl. There are a few of special

exploratory potential—for example, Nereus. In general, it's

much easier to get onto and off of near-Earth asteroids

than the Moon. Nereus, a tiny world about a kilometer

across, is one of the easiest.[‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡] It would be

real exploration of a truly new world.

Some humans (al from the former Soviet Union)

have already been in space for periods longer than the

entire roundtrip time to Nereus. The rocket technology

to get there already exists. It's a much smal er step

than going to Mars or even, in several respects, than

returning to the Moon. If something went wrong, though,

we would be unable to run home to safety in only a few

days. In this respect, its level of difficulty lies

somewhere between a voyage to Mars and one to the

Moon.

Of many possible future missions to Nereus, there's one

that takes 10 months to get there from Earth, spends 30

days there, and then requires only 3 weeks to return to

home. We could visit Nereus with robots, or—if we're up to

it—with humans. We could examine this little world's shape,

constitution, interior, past history, organic chemistry,

cosmic evolution, and possible tie to comets. We could

bring samples back for examination at leisure in

Earthbound laboratories. We could investigate whether

there real y are commercial y valuable resources—metals

or minerals—there. If we are ever going to send humans to

Mars, near-Earth asteroids provide a convenient and

appropriate intermediate goal—to test out the equipment

and exploratory protocols while studying an almost whol y

unknown little world. Here's a way to get our feet wet again

when we're ready to reenter the cosmic ocean.

C H A P T E R 18

THE MARSH

OF

CAMARINA

[I]t's too late to make any improvements now.

The universe is finished;

the copestone is on, and the chips were

carted off a million years ago.

—HERMAN MELVILLE,

MOBY DICK, CHAPTER 2 (1851)

Camarina was a city in southern Sicily, founded by

colonists from Syracuse in 598 B.C. A generation or two

later, it was threatened by a pestilence—festering, some

said, in the adjacent marsh. (While the germ theory of

disease was certainly not widely accepted in the ancient

world, there were hints-for example, Marcus Varro in the

first century B. C. advised explicitly against building cities

near swamps "because there are bred certain minute

creatures which cannot be seen by the eyes, which float in

the air and enter the body through the mouth and nose and

there cause serious disease.") The danger to Camarina

was great. Plans were drawn to drain the marsh. When the

oracle was consulted, though, it forbade such a course of

action, counseling patience instead. But lives were at

stake, the oracle was ignored, and the marsh was drained.

The pestilence was promptly halted. Too late, it was

recognized that the marsh had protected the city from its

enemies—among whom there had now to be counted their

cousins the Syracusans. As in America 2,300 years later,

the colonists had quarreled with the mother country. In 552

B.C., a Syracusan force crossed over the dry land where

the marsh had been, slaughtered every man, woman, and

child, and razed the city. The marsh of Camarina became

proverbial for eliminating a danger in such a way as to

usher in another, much worse.

THE CRETACEOUS-TERTIARY COLLISION (or col isions—there may

have been more than one) il uminates the peril from

asteroids and comets. In sequence, a world-immolating fire

burned vegetation to a crisp al over the planet; a

stratospheric dust cloud so darkened the sky that surviving

plants had trouble making a living from photosynthesis;

there were worldwide freezing temperatures, torrential rains

of caustic acids, massive depletion of the ozone layer, and,

to top it off, after the Earth healed itself from these assaults,

a prolonged greenhouse warming (because the main

impact seems to have volatilized a deep layer of

sedimentary carbonates, pouring huge amounts of carbon

dioxide into the air). It was not a single catastrophe, but a

parade of them, a concatenation of terrors. Organisms

weakened by one disaster were finished off by the next. It is

quite uncertain whether our civilization would survive even a

considerably less energetic col ision.

Since there are many more smal asteroids than large

ones, run-of-the-mil col isions with the Earth wil be made

by the little guys. But the longer you're prepared to wait, the

more devastating the impact you can expect. On average,

once every few hundred years the Earth is hit by an object

about 70 meters in diameter; the resulting energy released

is equivalent to the largest nuclear weapons explosion ever

detonated. Every 10,000 years, we're hit by a 200-meter

object that might induce serious regional climatic effects.

Every mil ion years, an impact by a body over 2 kilometers

in diameter occurs, equivalent to nearly a mil ion megatons

of TNT—an explosion that would work a global catastrophe,

kil ing (unless unprecedented precautions were taken) a

significant fraction of the human species. A mil ion

megatons of TNT is 100 times the explosive yield of al the

nuclear weapons on the planet, if simultaneously blown up.

Dwarfing even this, in a hundred mil ion years or so, you

can bet on something like the Cretaceous-Tertiary event,

the impact of a world 10 kilometers across or bigger. The

destructive energy latent in a large near-Earth asteroid

dwarfs anything else the human species can get its hands

on.

As first shown by the American planetary scientist

Christopher Chyba and his col eagues, little asteroids or

comets, a few tens of meters across, break and burn up on

entering our atmosphere. They arrive comparatively often

but do no significant harm. Some idea of how frequently

they enter the Earth's atmosphere has been revealed by

declassified Department of Defense data obtained from

special satel ites monitoring the Earth for clandestine

nuclear explosions. There seem to have been hundreds of

smal worldlets (and at least one larger body) impacting in

the last 20 years. They did no harm. But, we need to be

very sure we can distinguish a smal col iding comet or

asteroid from an atmospheric nuclear explosion.

Civilization-threatening impacts require bodies several

hundred meters across, or more. (A meter is about a yard;

100 meters is roughly the length of a footbal field.) They

arrive something like once every 200,000 years. Our

civilization is only about 10,000 years old, so we should

have no institutional memory of the last such impact. Nor do

we.

Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, in its succession of fiery

explosions on Jupiter in July 1994, reminds us that such

impacts real y do occur in our time—and that the impact of

a body a few kilometers across can spread debris over an

area as big as the Earth. It was a kind of portent.

In the very week of the Shoemaker-Levy impact, the

Science and Space Committee of the U.S. House of

Representatives drafted legislation that requires NASA "in

coordination with the Department of Defense and the

space agencies of other countries" to identify and

determine the orbital characteristics of al Earth-

approaching "comets and asteroids that are greater than 1

kilometer in diameter." The work is to be completed by the

year 2005. Such a search program had been advocated by

many planetary scientists. But it took the death throes of a

comet to move it toward practical implementation.

Spread out over the waiting time, the dangers of asteroid

col ision do not seem very worrisome. But if a big impact

happens, it would be an unprecedented human

catastrophe. There's something like one chance in two

thousand that such a col ision wil happen in the lifetime of a

newborn baby. Most of us would not fly in an airplane if the

chance of crashing were one in two thousand. (In fact for

commercial flights the chance is one in two mil ion. Even

so, many people consider this large enough to worry about,

or even to take out insurance for.) When our lives are at

stake, we often change our behavior to arrange more

favorable odds. Those who don't tend to be no longer with

us.

Perhaps we should practice getting to these worldlets

and diverting their orbits, should the hour of need ever

arise. Melvil e notwithstanding, some of the chips of

creation are stil left, and improvements evidently need to

be made. Along paral el and only weakly interacting tracks,

the planetary science community and the U.S. and Russian

nuclear weapons laboratories, aware of the foregoing

scenarios, have been pursuing these questions: how to

monitor al sizable near-Earth interplanetary objects, how to

characterize their physical and chemical nature, how to

predict which ones may be on a future col ision trajectory

with Earth, and, final y, how to prevent a col ision from

happening.

The Russian spaceflight pioneer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky

argued a century ago that there must be bodies

intermediate il size between the observed large asteroids

and those asteroidal fragments, the meteorites, that

occasional y fal to Earth. He wrote about living on smal

asteroids in interplanetary space. He did not have military

applications in mind. In the early 1980s, though, some in

the U.S. weapons establishment argued that the Soviets

might use near-Earth asteroids as first-strike weapons; the

al eged

plan

was

cal ed

"Ivan's

Hammer."



Countermeasures were needed. But, at the same time, it

was suggested, maybe it wasn't a bad idea for the United

States to learn how to use smal worlds as weapons of its

own. The Defense Department's Bal istic Missile Defense

Organization, the successor to the Star Wars office of the

1980s,

launched

an

innovative

spacecraft

cal ed

Clementine to orbit the Moon and fly by the near-Earth

asteroid Geographos. (After completing a remarkable

reconnaissance of the Moon in May 1994, the spacecraft

failed before it could reach Geographos.)

In principle, you could use big rocket engines, or

projectile impact, or equip tile asteroid with giant reflective

panels and shove it with sunlight or powerful Earth-based

lasers. But with technology that exists right now, there are

only two ways. First, one or more high-yield nuclear

weapons might blast the asteroid or comet into fragments

that would disintegrate and atomize on entering the Earth's

atmosphere. If the offending worldlet is only weakly held

together, perhaps only hundreds of megatons would suffice.

Since there is no theoretical upper limit to the explosive

yield of a thermonuclear weapon, there seem to be those in

the weapons laboratories who consider making bigger

bombs not only as a stirring chal enge, but also as a way to

mute pesky environmentalists by securing a seat for

nuclear weapons on the save-the-Earth bandwagon.

Another approach under more serious discussion is less

dramatic but stil an effective way of maintaining the

weapons establishment—a plan to alter the orbit of any

errant worldlet by exploding nuclear weapons nearby. The

explosions (general y near the asteroid's closest point to

the Sun) are arranged to deflect it away from the

Earth.[§§§§§§§§] A flurry of low-yield nuclear weapons,

each giving a little push in the desired direction, is enough

to deflect a medium-sized asteroid with only a few weeks'

warning. The method also offers, it is hoped, a way to deal

with a suddenly detected long-period comet on imminent

col ision trajectory with the Earth: The comet would be

intercepted with a smal asteroid. (Needless to say, this

game of celestial bil iards is even more difficult and

uncertain—and therefore even less practical in the near

future—than the herding of an asteroid on a known, wel -

behaved orbit with months or years at our disposal.)

We don't know what a standoff nuclear explosion

would do to an asteroid. The answer may vary from

asteroid to asteroid. Some smal worlds might be strongly

held together; others might be little more than self-

gravitating gravel heaps. If an explosion breaks, let's say, a

10kilometer asteroid up into hundreds of 1-kilometer

fragments, the likelihood that at least one of them impacts

the Earth is probably increased, and the apocalyptic

character of the consequences may not be much reduced.

On the other hand, if the explosion disrupts the asteroid into

a swarm of objects a hundred meters in diameter or

smal er, al of them might ablate away like giant meteors on

entering the Earth's atmosphere. In this case little impact

damage would be caused. Even if the asteroid were whol y

pulverized into fine powder, though, the resulting high-

altitude dust layer might be so opaque as to block the

sunlight and change the climate. We do not yet know.

A vision of dozens or hundreds of nuclear-armed

missiles on ready standby to deal with threatening

asteroids or comets has been offered. However premature

in this particular application, it seems very familiar; only the

enemy has been changed. It also seems very dangerous.

The problem, Steven Ostro of JPL and I have

suggested, is that if you can reliably deflect a threatening

worldlet so it does not col ide with the Earth, you can also

reliably deflect a harmless worldlet so it does col ide with

the Earth. Suppose you had a ful inventory, with orbits, of

the estimated 300,000 near-Earth asteroids larger than

100 meters—each of them large enough, on impacting the

Earth, to have serious consequences. Then, it turns out, you

also have a list of huge numbers of inoffensive asteroids

whose orbits could be altered with nuclear warheads so

they quickly col ide with the Earth.

Suppose we restrict our attention to the 2,000 or so

near-Earth asteroids that are a kilometer across or bigger

—that is, the ones most likely to cause a global

catastrophe. Today, with only about 100 of these objects

catalogued, it would take about a century to catch one when

it's easily deflectable to Earth and alter its orbit. We think

we've found one, an as-yet-unnamed[*********] asteroid

so far denoted only as 1991OA. In 2070, this world, about 1

kilometer in diameter, wil come within 4.5 mil ion

kilometers of the Earth's orbit—only fifteen times the

distance to the Moon. To deflect 1991OA so it hits the

Earth, only about 60 megatons of TNT equivalent needs to

be exploded in the right way—the equivalent of a smal

number of currently available nuclear warheads.

Now imagine a time, a few decades hence, when

al such near-Earth asteroids are inventoried and their

orbits compiled. Then, as Alan Harris of JPL, Greg

Canavan of the Los Alamos National Laboratory, Ostro,

and I have shown, it might take only a year to select a

suitable object, alter its orbit, and send it crashing into the

Earth with cataclysmic effect.

The technology required—large optical telescopes,

sensitive detectors, rocket propulsion systems able to lift a

few tons of payload and make precise rendezvous in

nearby space, and thermonuclear weapons—al exist

today. Improvements in al but perhaps the last can be

confidently expected. If we're not careful, many nations may

have these capabilities in the next few decades. What kind

of world wil we then have made?

We have a tendency to minimize the dangers of new

technologies. A year before the Chernobyl disaster, a

Soviet nuclear power industry deputy minister was asked

about the safety of Soviet reactors, and chose Chernobyl

as a particularly safe site. The average waiting time to

disaster, he confidently estimated, was a hundred thousand

years. Less than a year later . . . devastation. Similar

reassurances were provided by NASA contractors the year

before the Challenger disaster: You would have to wait ten

thousand years, they estimated, for a catastrophic failure of

the shuttle. One year later . . . heartbreak.

Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were developed specifical y

as a completely safe refrigerant—to replace ammonia and

other refrigerants that, on leaking out, had caused il ness

and some deaths. Chemical y inert, nontoxic (in ordinary

concentrations),

odorless,

tasteless,

non-al ergenic,

nonflammable, CFCs represent a bril iant technical solution

to a wel -defined practical problem. They found uses in

many other industries besides refrigeration and air

conditioning. But, as I described above, the chemists who

developed CFCs overlooked one essential fact—that the

molecules' very inertness guarantees that they are

circulated to stratospheric altitudes and there cracked open

by sunlight, releasing chlorine atoms which then attack the

protective ozone layer. Due to the work of a few scientists,

the dangers may have been recognized and averted in

time. We humans have now almost stopped producing

CFCs. We won't actual y know if we've avoided real harm

for about a century; that's how long it takes for al the CFC

damage to be completed. Like the ancient Camarinans, we

make mistakes.[†††††††††] Not only do we often

ignore the warnings of the Oracles; characteristical y we do

not even consult them.

The notion of moving asteroids into Earth orbit has

proved attractive to some space scientists and long-range

planners. They foresee mining the minerals and precious

metals of these worlds or providing resources for the

construction of space infrastructure without having to fight

the Earth's gravity to get them up there. Articles have been

published on how to accomplish this end and what the

benefits wil be. In modern discussions, the asteroid is

inserted into orbit around the Earth by first making it pass

through and be braked by the Earth's atmosphere, a

maneuver with very little margin for error. For the near future

we can, I think, recognize this whole endeavor as unusual y

dangerous and foolhardy, especial y for metal worldlets

larger than tens of meters across. This is the one activity

where errors in navigation or propulsion or mission design

can have the most sweeping and catastrophic

consequences.

The foregoing are examples of inadvertence. But

there's another kind of peril: We are sometimes told that

this or that invention would of course not be misused. No

sane person would be so reckless. This is the "only a

madman" argument. Whenever I hear it (and it's often

trotted out in such debates), I remind myself that madmen

real y exist. Sometimes they achieve the highest levels of

political power in modern industrial nations. This is the

century of Hitler and Stalin, tyrants who posed the gravest

dangers not just to the rest of the human family, but to their

own people as wel . In the winter and spring of 1945, Hitler

ordered Germany to be destroyed—even "what the people

need for elementary survival"—because the surviving

Germans had "betrayed" him, and at any rate were

"inferior" to those who had already died. If Hitler had had

nuclear weapons, the threat of a counterstrike by Al ied

nuclear weapons, had there been any, is unlikely to have

dissuaded him. It might have encouraged him.

Can we humans be trusted with civilization-threatening

technologies? If the chance is almost one in a thousand that

much of the human population wil be kil ed by an impact in

the next century, isn't it more likely that asteroid deflection

technology wil get into the wrong hands in another century

—some misanthropic sociopath like a Hitler or a Stalin

eager to kil everybody, a megalomaniac lusting after

"greatness" and "glory," a victim of ethnic violence bent on

revenge, someone in the grip of unusual y severe

testosterone poisoning, some religious fanatic hastening

the Day of judgment, or just technicians incompetent or

insufficiently vigilant in handling the controls and

safeguards? Such people exist. The risks seem far worse

than the benefits, the cure worse than the disease. The

cloud of near-Earth asteroids through which the Earth plows

may constitute a modern Camarine marsh.

It's easy to think that al of this must be very unlikely, mere

anxious fantasy. Surely sober heads would prevail. Think of

how many people would be involved in preparing and

launching warheads, in space navigation, in detonating

warheads, in checking what orbital perturbation each

nuclear explosion has made, in herding the asteroid so it is

on an impact trajectory with Earth, and so on. Isn't it

noteworthy that although Hitler gave orders for the

retreating Nazi troops to burn Paris and to lay waste to

Germany itself, his orders were not carried out? Surely

someone essential to the success of the deflection mission

wil recognize the danger. Even assurances that the project

is designed to destroy some vile enemy nation would

probably be disbelieved, because the effects of col ision

are planet-wide (and anyway it's very hard to make sure

your asteroid excavates its monster crater in a particularly

deserving nation).

But now imagine a totalitarian state, not overrun by

enemy troops, but one thriving and self-confident. Imagine a

tradition in which orders are obeyed without question.

Imagine that those involved in the operation are supplied a

cover story: The asteroid is about to impact the Earth, and

it is their job to deflect it—but in order not to worry people

needlessly, the operation must be performed in secret. In a

military setting with a command hierarchy firmly in place,

compartmentalization of knowledge, general secrecy, and

a cover story, can we be confident that even apocalyptic

orders would be disobeyed? Are we real y sure that in the

next decades and centuries and mil ennia, nothing like this

might happen? How sure are we?

It's no use saying that al technologies can be used for

good or for il . That is certainly true, but when the "il "

achieves a sufficiently apocalyptic scale, we may have to

set limits on which technologies may be developed. (In a

way we do this al the time, because we can't afford to

develop al technologies. Some are favored and some are

not.) Or constraints may have to be levied by the community

of nations on madmen and autarchs and fanaticism.

Tracking asteroids and comets is prudent, it's good

science, and it doesn't cost much. But, knowing our

weaknesses, why would we even consider now developing

the technology to deflect smal worlds? For safety, shal we

imagine this technology in the hands of many nations, each

providing checks and balances against misuse by another?

This is nothing like the old nuclear balance of terror. It hardly

inhibits some madman intent on global catastrophe to know

that if he does not hurry, a rival may beat him to it. How

confident can we be that the community of nations wil be

able to detect a cleverly designed, clandestine asteroid

deflection in time to do something about it? If such a

technology were developed, can any international

safeguards be envisioned that have a reliability

commensurate with the risk?

Even if we restrict ourselves merely to surveil ance,

there's a risk. Imagine that in a generation we characterize

the orbits of 30,000 objects of 100-meter diameter or

more, and that this information is publicized, as of course it

should be. Maps wil be published showing near-Earth

space black with the orbits of asteroids and comets,

30,000 swords of Damocles hanging over our heads-ten

times more than the number of stars visible to the naked

eye under conditions of optimum atmospheric clarity.

Public anxiety might be much greater in such a time of

knowledge than in our current age of ignorance. There

might be irresistible public pressure to develop means to

mitigate even nonexistent threats, which would then feed

the danger that deflection technology would be misused.

For this reason, asteroid discovery and surveil ance may

not be a mere neutral tool of future policy, but rather a kind

of booby trap. To me, the only foreseeable solution is a

combination of accurate orbit estimation, realistic threat

assessment, and effective public education—so that in

democracies at least, the citizens can make their own,

informed decisions. This is a job for NASA.

Near-Earth asteroids, and means of altering their orbits,

are being looked at seriously. There is some sign that

officials in the Department of Defense and the weapons

laboratories are beginning to understand that there may be

real dangers in planning to push asteroids around. Civilian

and military scientists have met to discuss the subject. On

first hearing about the asteroid hazard, many people think

of it as a kind of Chicken Little fable; Goosey-Lucy, newly

arrived and in great excitement, is communicating the

urgent news that the sky is fal ing. The tendency to dismiss

the prospect of any catastrophe that we have not personal y

witnessed is in the long run very foolish. But in this case it

may be an al y of prudence.





MEANWHILE WE MUST STILL FACE the deflection dilemma. If we

develop and deploy this technology, it may do us in. If we

don't, some asteroid or comet may do us in. The resolution

of the dilemma hinges, I think, on the fact that the likely

timescales of the two dangers are very different—short for

the former, long for the latter.

I like to think that our future involvement with near-

Earth asteroids wil go something like this: From ground-

based observatories, we discover al the big ones, plot and

monitor their orbits, determine rotation rates and

compositions. Scientists are diligent in explaining the

dangers—neither exaggerating nor muting the prospects.

We send robotic spacecraft to fly by a few selected bodies,

orbit them, land on them, and return surface samples to

laboratories on Earth. Eventual y we send humans.

(Because of the low gravities, they wil be able to make

standing broad jumps of ten kilometers or more into the

sky, and lob a basebal into orbit around the asteroid.) Ful y

aware of the dangers, we make no attempts to alter

trajectories until the potential for misuse of world-altering

technologies is much less. That might take a while.

If we're too quick in developing the technology to

move worlds around, we may destroy ourselves; if we're too

slow, we wil surely destroy ourselves. The reliability of

world political organizations and the confidence they

inspire wil have to make significant strides before they can

be trusted to deal with a problem of this seriousness. At the

same time, there seems to be no acceptable national

solution. Who would feel comfortable with the means of

world destruction in the hands of some dedicated (or even

potential) enemy nation, whether or not our nation had

comparable powers? The existence of interplanetary

col ision hazards, when widely understood, works to bring

our species together. When facing a common danger, we

humans have sometimes reached heights widely thought

impossible; we have set aside our differences—at least

until the danger passed.

B u t this danger never passes. The asteroids,

gravitational y churning, are slowly altering their orbits;

without warning, new comets come careening toward us

from the transplutonian darkness. There wil always be a

need to deal with them in a way that does not endanger us.

By posing two different classes of peril—one natural, the

other human-made—the smal near-Earth worlds provide a

new and potent motivation to create effective transnational

institutions and to unify the human species. It's hard to see

any satisfactory alternative.

In our usual jittery, two-steps-forward-one-step-back

mode, We are moving toward unification anyway. There are

powerful influences deriving from transportation and

communications technologies, the interdependent world

economy, and the global environmental crisis. The impact

hazard merely hastens the pace.

Eventual y, cautiously, scrupulously careful to attempt

nothing with asteroids that could inadvertently cause a

catastrophe on Earth, I imagine we wil begin to learn how

to change the orbits of little nonmetal ic worlds, smal er than

100 meters across. We begin with smal er explosions and

slowly work our way up. We gain experience in changing

the orbits of various asteroids and comets of different

compositions and strengths. We try to determine which

ones can be pushed around and which cannot. By the

twenty-second century, perhaps, we move smal worlds

around the Solar System, using (see next chapter) not

nuclear explosions but nuclear fusion engines or their

equivalents. We insert smal asteroids made of precious

and industrial metals into Earth orbit. Gradual y develop a

defensive technology to deflect a large asteroid or comet

that might in the foreseeable future hit the Earth, while, with

meticulous care, we build layers of safeguards against

misuse.

Since the danger of misusing deflection technology

seems so much greater than the danger of an imminent

impact, we can afford to wait, take precautions, rebuild

political institutions—for decades certainly, probably

centuries. If we play our cards right and are not unlucky, we

can pace what we do up there by what progress we're

making down here. The two are in any case deeply

connected.

The asteroid hazard forces our hand. Eventual y, we must

establish a formidable human presence throughout the

inner Solar System. On an issue of this importance I do not

think we wil be content with purely robotic means of

mitigation. To do so safely we must make changes in our

political and international systems. While much about our

future is cloudy, this conclusion seems a little more robust,

and independent of the vagaries of human institutions.

In the long term, even if we were not the descendants of

professional wanderers, even if we were not inspired by

exploratory passions, some of us would stil have to leave

the Earth—simply to ensure the survival of al of us. And

once we're out there, we'l need bases, infrastructures. It

would not be very long before some of us were living in

artificial habitats and on other worlds. This is the first of two

mussing arguments, omitted in our discussion of missions

to Mars, for a permanent human presence in space.

OTHER PLANETARY SYSTEMS must face their own impact

hazards—because smal primordial worlds, of which

asteroids and comets are remnants, are the stuff out of

which planets form there as wel . After the planets are

made, many of these planetesimals are left over. The

average time between civilization-threatening impacts on

Earth is perhaps 200,000 years, twenty times the age of

our civilization. Very different waiting times may pertain to

extraterrestrial civilizations, if they exist, depending on such

factors as the physical and chemical characteristics of the

planet and its biosphere, the biological and social nature of

the civilization, and of course the col ision rate itself.

Planets with higher atmospheric pressures wil be

protected against somewhat larger 1mpactors, although

the pressure cannot be much greater before greenhouse

warming and other consequences make life improbable. If

the gravity is much less than on Earth, impactors wil make

less energetic col isions and the hazard wil be reduced—

although it cannot be reduced very much before the

atmosphere escapes to space.

The impact rate in other planetary systems is

uncertain. Our system contains two major populations of

smal bodies that feed potential impactors into Earth-

crossing orbits. Both the existence of the source

populations and the mechanisms that maintain the col ision

rate depend on how worlds are distributed. For example,

our Oort Cloud seems to have been populated by

gravitational ejections of icy worldlets from the vicinity of

Uranus and Neptune. If there are no planets that play the

role of Uranus and Neptune in systems otherwise like our

own, their Oort Clouds may be much more thinly populated.

Stars in open and globular stel ar clusters, stars in double

or multiple systems, stars closer to the center of the Galaxy,

stars experiencing more frequent encounters with Giant

Molecular Clouds in interstel ar space, may al experience

higher impact fluxes at their terrestrial planets. The

cometary flux might be hundreds or thousands of times

more at the Earth had the planet Jupiter never formed—

according to a calculation by George Wetheril of the

Carnegie Institution of Washington. In systems without

Jupiter-like planets, the gravitational shield against comets

is down, and civilization-threatening impacts much more

frequent.

To a certain extent, increased fluxes of interplanetary

objects might increase the rate of evolution, as the

mammals that flourished and diversified after the

Cretaceous-Tertiary col ision wiped out the dinosaurs. But

there must be a point of diminishing returns: Clearly, some

flux is too high for the continuance of any civilization.

One consequence of this train of argument is that, even

if civilizations commonly arise on planets throughout the

Galaxy, few of them wil be both long-lived and non-

technological. Since hazards from asteroids and comets

must apply to inhabited planets al over the Galaxy, if there

are such, intel igent beings everywhere wil have to unify

their home worlds political y, leave their planets, and move

smal nearby worlds around. Their eventual choice, as ours,

is spaceflight or extinction.

C

H A P T E R 19

REMAKING

THE

PLANETS

Who could deny that man could

somehow also make the heavens,

could he only obtain the

instruments and the heavenly material?

—MARSILIO FICINO,

"THE SOUL OF MAN" (CA. 1474)

In the midst of the Second World War, a young American

writer named Jack Wil iamson envisioned a populated

Solar System. In the twenty-second century, he imagined,

Venus would be settled by China,[‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡] Japan, and

Indonesia; Mars by Germany; and the moons of Jupiter by

Russia. Those who spoke English, the language in which

Wil iamson was writing, were confined to the asteroids-and

of course the Earth.

The story, published in Astounding Science Fiction in

July 1942, was cal ed "Col ision Orbit" and written under the

pseudonym Wil Stewart. Its plot hinged on the imminent

col ision of an uninhabited asteroid with a colonized one,

and the search for a means of altering the trajectories of

smal worlds. Although no one on Earth was endangered,

this may have been the first appearance, apart from

newspaper comic strips, of asteroid col isions as a threat

to humans. (Comets impacting the Earth had been a staple

peril.)

The environments of Mars and Venus were poorly

understood in the early 1940s; it was conceivable that

humans could live there without elaborate life-support

systems. But the asteroids were another matter. It was wel

known, even then, that asteroids were smal , dry, airless

worlds. If they were to be inhabited, especial y by large

numbers of people, these little worlds would somehow have

to be fixed.

In "Col ision Orbit," Wil iamson portrays a group of

"spatial engineers," able to render such barren outposts

clement. Coining a word, Wil iamson cal ed the process of

metamorphosis into an Earth-like world "terraforming." He

knew that the low gravity on an asteroid means that any

atmosphere generated or transported there would quickly

escape to space. So his key terraforming technology was

"paragravity," an artificial gravity that would hold a dense

atmosphere.

As nearly as we can tel today, paragravity is a physical

impossibility. But we can imagine domed, transparent

habitats on the surfaces of asteroids, as suggested by

Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, or communities established in the

insides of asteroids, as outlined in the 1920s by the British

scientist J. D. Bernal. Because asteroids are smal and

their gravities low, even massive subsurface construction

might be comparatively easy. If a tunnel were dug clean

through, you could jump in at one end and emerge some 45

minutes later at the other, oscil ating up and down along the

tol diameter of this world indefinitely. Inside the right kind of

asteroid, a carbonaceous one, you can find materials for

manufacturing stone, metal, and plastic construction and

plentiful water—al you might need to build a subsurface

closed ecological system, an underground garden.

Implementation would require a significant step beyond

what we have today, but—unlike "paragravity"—nothing in

such a scheme seems impossible. Al the elements can be

found in contemporary technology. If there were sufficient

reason, a fair number of us could be living on (or in

asteroids by the twenty-second century.

They would of course need a source of power, not just to

sustain themselves, but, as Bernal suggested, to move their

asteroidal homes around. (It does not seem so big a step

from explosive alteration of asteroid orbits to a more gentle

means of propulsion a century or two later.) If an oxygen

atmosphere were generated from chemical y bound water,

then organics could be burned to generate power, just as

fossil fuels are burned on the Earth today. Solar power

could be considered, although for the main-belt asteroids

the intensity of sunlight is only about 10 percent what it is on

Earth. Stil , we could imagine vast fields of solar panels

covering the surfaces of inhabited asteroids and converting

sunlight into electricity. Photovoltaic technology is routinely

used in Earth-orbiting spacecraft, and is in increasing use

on the surface of the Earth today. But while that might be

enough to warm and light the homes of these descendants,

it does not seem adequate to change asteroid orbits.

For that, Wil iamson proposed using anti-matter.

Antimatter is just like ordinary matter, with one significant

difference. Consider hydrogen: An ordinary hydrogen atom

consists of a positively charged proton on the inside and a

negatively charged electron on the outside. An atom of anti-

hydrogen consists of a negatively charged proton on the

inside and a positively charged electron (also cal ed a

positron) on the outside. The protons, whatever the sign of

their charges, have the same mass; and the electrons,

whatever the sign of their charges, have the same mass.

Particles with opposite charges attract. A hydrogen atom

and an anti-hydrogen atom are both stable, because in

both cases the positive and negative electrical charges

precisely balance.

Anti-matter is not some hypothetical construct from the

perfervid musings of science fiction writers or theoretical

physicists. Anti-matter exists. Physicists make it in nuclear

accelerators; it can be found in high-energy cosmic rays.

So why don't we hear more about it? Why has no one held

up a lump of antimatter for our inspection? Because matter

and anti-matter, when brought into contact, violently

annihilate each other, disappearing in an intense burst of

gamma rays. We cannot tel whether something is made of

matter or anti-matter just by looking at it. The spectroscopic

properties of, for example, hydrogen and anti-hydrogen are

identical.

Albert Einstein's answer to the question of why we see

only matter and not anti-matter was, "Matter won"—by

which he meant that in our sector of the Universe at least,

after almost al the matter and anti-matter interacted and

annihilated each other long ago, there was some of what

we cal ordinary matter left over.[§§§§§§§§§] As far as

we can tel today, from gamma ray astronomy and other

means, the Universe is made almost entirely of matter. The

reason for this engages the deepest cosmological issues,

which need not detain us here. But if there was only a one-

particle-in-a-bil ion difference in the preponderance of

matter over anti-matter at the beginning, even this would be

enough to explain the Universe we see today.

Wil iamson imagined that humans in the twenty-second

century would move asteroids around by the control ed

mutual annihilation of matter and anti-matter. Al the

resulting gamma rays, if col imated, would make a potent

rocket exhaust. The anti-matter would be available in the

main asteroid belt (between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter),

because this was his explanation for the existence of the

asteroid belt. In the remote past, he proposed, an intruder

anti-matter worldlet arrived in the Solar System from the

depths of space, impacted, and annihilated what was then

an Earthlike planet, fifth from the Sun. The fragments of this

mighty col ision are the asteroids, and some of them are

stil made of anti-matter. Harness an anti-asteroid—

Wil iamson recognized that this might be tricky—and you

can move worlds around at wil .

At the time, Wil iamson's ideas were futuristic, but far

from foolish. Some of "Col ision Orbit" can be considered

visionary. Today, however, we have good reason to believe

that there are no significant amounts of anti-matter in the

Solar System, and that the asteroid belt, far from being a

fragmented terrestrial planet, is an enormous array of smal

bodies prevented (by the gravitational tides of Jupiter) from

forming an Earthlike world.

However, we do generate (very) smal amounts of

antimatter in nuclear accelerators today, and we wil

probably be able to manufacture much larger amounts by

the twenty-second century. Because it is so efficient—

converting all of the matter into energy, E = MC2, with 100

percent efficiency—perhaps anti-matter engines wil be a

practical technology by then, vindicating Wil iamson Failing

that, what energy sources can we realistical y expect to be

available, to reconfigure asteroids, to light them warm

them, and move them around?

The Sun shines by jamming protons together and turning

them into helium nuclei. Energy is released in the process,

although with less than 1 percent the efficiency of the

annihilation of matter and anti-matter. But even proton-

proton reactions are far beyond anything we can

realistical y imagine for ourselves in the near future. The

required temperatures are much too high. Instead) of

jamming protons together, though, we might use heavier

kinds of hydrogen. We already do so in thermonuclear

weapons. Deuterium is a proton bound by nuclear forces to

a neutron; tritium is a proton bound by nuclear forces to two

neutrons. It seems likely that in another century we wil have

practical power schemes that involve the control ed fusion

of deuterium and tritium, and of deuterium and helium.

Deuterium and tritium are present as minor constituents in

water (on Earth and other worlds). The kind of helium

needed for fusion, 3He (two protons and a neutron make up

its nucleus), has been implanted over bil ions of years by

the solar wind in the surfaces of the asteroids. These

processes are not nearly as efficient as the proton-proton

reactions in the Sun, but they could provide enough power

to run a smal city for a year from a lode of ice only a few

meters in size.

Fusion reactors seem to be coming along too slowly to

play a major role in solving, or even significantly mitigating,

global warming. But by the twenty-second century, they

ought to be widely available. With fusion rocket engines, it

wil be possible to more asteroids and comets around the

inner Solar System taking a main-belt asteroid, for

example, and inserting it into orbit around the Earth. A

world 10 kilometers across could be transported from

Saturn, say, to Mars through nuclear burning of the

hydrogen in an icy comet a kilometer across. (Again, I'm

assuming a time of much greater political stability and

safety.)

PUT ASIDE FOR THE MOMENT any qualms you might have about

the ethics of rearranging worlds, or our ability to do so

without catastrophic consequences. Digging out the

insides of worldlets, reconfiguring them for human

habitation, and moving them from one place in the Solar

System to another seems to be within our grasp in another

century or two. Perhaps by then we wil have adequate

international safeguards as wel . But what about

transforming the surface environments not of asteroids or

comets, but of planets? Could we live on Mars?

If we wanted to set up housekeeping on Mars, it's easy to

see that, in principle at least, we could do it: There's

abundant sunlight. There's plentiful water in the rocks and in

underground and polar ice. The atmosphere is mostly

carbon dioxide. It seems likely that in self-contained

habitats-perhaps domed enclosures—we could grow

crops, manufacture oxygen from water, recycle wastes.

At first we'd be dependent on commodities resupplied

from Earth, but in time we'd manufacture more and more of

them ourselves. We'd become increasingly self-sufficient.

The domed enclosures, even if made of ordinary glass,

would let in the visible sunlight and screen out the Sun's

ultraviolet rays. With oxygen masks and protective

garments—but nothing as bulky and cumbersome as a

spacesuit—we could leave these enclosures to go

exploring, or to build another domed vil age and farms.

It seems very evocative of the American pioneering

experience, but with at least one major difference: In the

early stages, large subsidies are essential. The technology

required is too expensive for some poor family, like my

grandparents a century ago, to pay their own passage to

Mars. The early Martian pioneers wil be sent by

governments and wil have highly specialized skil s. But in a

generation or two, when children and grandchildren are

born there— and especial y when self-sufficiency is within

reach—that wil begin to change. Youngsters born on Mars

wil be given specialized training in the technology essential

for survival in this new environment. The settlers wil

become less heroic and less exceptional. The ful range of

human strengths and deficiencies wil begin to assert

themselves. Gradual y, precisely because of the difficulty of

getting from Earth to Mars, a unique Martian culture wil

begin to emerge—distinct aspirations and fears tied to the

environment they live in, distinct technologies, distinct

social problems, distinct solutions—and, as has occurred

in every similar circumstance throughout human history, a

gradual sense of cultural and political estrangement from

the mother world.

Great ships wil arrive carrying essential technology

from Earth, new families of settlers, scarce resources. It is

hard to know, on the basis of our limited knowledge of

Mars, whether they wil go home empty—or whether they

wil carry with them something found only on Mars,

something considered very valuable on Earth. Initial y much

of the scientific investigation of samples of the Martian

surface wil be done on Earth. But in time the scientific

study of Mars (and its moons Phobos and Deimos) wil be

done from Mars.

Eventual y—as has happened with virtual y every other

form of human transportation—interplanetary travel wil

become accessible to people of ordinary means: to

scientists pursuing their own research projects, to settlers

fed up with Earth, even to venturesome tourists. And of

course there wil be explorers.

If the time ever came when it was possible to make the

Martian environment much more Earth-like—so protective

garments, oxygen masks, and domed farmlands and cities

could be dispensed with—the attraction and accessibility of

Mars would be increased many-fold. The same, of course,

would be true for any other world which could be

engineered so that humans could live there without

elaborate contrivances to keep the planetary environment

out. We would feel much more comfortable in our adopted

home if an intact dome or spacesuit weren't al that stood

between us and death. (But perhaps I exaggerate the

dangers. People who live in the Netherlands seem at least

as wel adjusted and carefree as other inhabitants of

Northern Europe; vet their dikes are al that stand between

them and the sea.

Recognizing the speculative nature of the question and

the limitations in our knowledge, is it nevertheless possible

to envision terraforming the planets?

We need look no further than our own world to see that

humans are now able to alter planetary environments in a

profound way. Depletion of the ozone layer, global warming

from an increased greenhouse effect, and global cooling

from nuclear war are al ways in which present technology

can significantly alter the environment of our world—and in

each case as an inadvertent consequence of doing

something else. If we had intended to alter our planetary

environment, we would be ful y able to generate stil greater

change. As our technology becomes more powerful, we wil

be able to work stil more profound changes.

But just as (in paral el parking) it's easier to get out of a

parking place than into one, it's easier to destroy a

planetary environment than to move it into a narrowly

prescribed

range

of

temperatures,

pressures,

compositions, and so on. We already know of a multitude

of desolate and uninhabitable worlds, and—with very

narrow margins—only one green and clement one. This is a

major conclusion from early in the era of spacecraft

exploration of the Solar System. In altering the Earth, or any

world with an atmosphere, we must be very careful about

positive feedbacks, where we nudge an environment a little

bit and it takes of on its own—a little cooling leading to

runaway glaciation, as may have happened on Mars, or a

little warming to a runaway greenhouse effect, as happened

on Venus. It is not at al clear that our knowledge is

sufficient to this purpose.

As far as I know, the first suggestion in the scientific

literature about terraforming the planets was made in a

1961 article I wrote about Venus. I was pretty sure then that

Venus had a surface temperature wel above the normal

boiling point of water, produced by a carbon dioxide/water

vapor greenhouse effect. I imagined seeding its high

clouds with genetical y engineered microorganisms that

would take CO2, N2, and H2O out of the atmosphere and

convert them into organic molecules. The more CO2

removed, the smal er the greenhouse effect and the cooler

the surface. The microbes would be carried down through

the atmosphere toward the ground, where they would be

fried, so water vapor would be returned to the atmosphere;

but the carbon from the CO2 would be converted

irreversibly by the high temperatures into graphite or some

other involatile form of carbon. Eventual y, the temperatures

would fal below the boiling point and the surface of Venus

would become habitable, dotted with pools and lakes of

warm water.

The idea was soon taken up by a number of science

fiction authors in the continuing dance between science

and science fiction—in which the science stimulates the

fiction, and the fiction stimulates a new generation of

scientists, a process benefiting both genres. But as the

next step in the dance, it is now clear that seeding Venus

with special photosynthetic microorganisms wil not work.

Since 1961 we've discovered that the clouds of Venus are

a concentrated solution of sulfuric acid, which makes the

genetic engineering rather more chal enging. But that in

itself is not a fatal flaw. (There are microorganisms that live

out their lives in concentrated solutions of sulfuric acid.)

Here's the fatal flaw: In 1961 I thought the atmospheric

pressure at the surface of Venus N\-as a few "bars," a few

times the surface pressure on Earth. We now know it to be

90 bars, so that if the scheme worked, the result would be a

surface buried in hundreds of meters of fine graphite, and

an atmosphere made of 65 bars of almost pure molecular

oxygen. Whether we would first implode under the

atmospheric pressure or spontaneously burst into flames in

al that oxygen is an open question. However, long before

so much oxygen could build up, the graphite would

spontaneously burn back into CO2, short-circuiting the

process. At best, such a scheme can carry the terraforming

of Venus only partway.

Let's assume that by the early twenty-second century we

have comparatively inexpensive heavy-lift vehicles, so we

can carry large payloads to other worlds; abundant and

powerful fusion reactors; and wel -developed genetic

engineering. Al three assumptions are likely, given current

trends. Could we terraform the planets?[**********]

James Pol ack of NASA's Ames Research Center and I

surveyed this problem. Here's a summary of what we found:

VENUS: Clearly the problem with Venus is its massive

greenhouse effect. If we could reduce the greenhouse

effect almost to zero, the climate might be balmy. But a 90-

bar CO2 atmosphere is oppressively thick. Over every

postage stamp-sized square inch of surface, the air weighs

as much as six professional footbal players, piled one on

top of another. Making al that go away wil take some

doing.

Imagine bombarding Venus with asteroids and comets.

Each impact would blow away some of the atmosphere. To

blow away almost al of it, though, would require using up

more big asteroids and comets than there are—at least in

the planetary part of the Solar System. Even if that many

potential impactors existed, even if we could make them al

col ide with Venus (this is the overkil approach to the

impact hazard problem), think what we would have lost.

Who knows what wonders, what practical knowledge they

contain? We would also obliterate much of Venus'

gorgeous surface geology—which we've just begun to

understand, and which may teach us much about the Earth.

This is an example of bruteforce terraforming. I suggest we

want to steer entirely clear of such methods, even if

someday we'l be able to afford them (which I very much

doubt). We want something more elegant, more subtle,

more respectful of the environments of other worlds. A

microbial approach has some of those virtues, but does not

do the trick, as we've just seen.

We can imagine pulverizing a dark asteroid and

spreading the powder through the upper atmosphere of

Venus, or carrying such dust up from the surface. This

would be the physical equivalent of nuclear winter or the

Cretaceous-Tertiary post-impact climate. If the sunlight

reaching the ground is sufficiently attenuated, the surface

temperature must fal . But by its very nature, this option

plunges Venus into deep gloom, with daytime light levels

perhaps only as bright as on a moonlit night on Earth. The

oppressive, crushing 90-bar atmosphere would remain

untouched. Since the emplaced dust would sediment out

every few years, the layer would have to be replenished in

the same period of time. Perhaps such an approach would

be acceptable for short exploratory missions, but the

environment generated seems very stark for a self-

sustaining human community on Venus.

We could use a giant artificial sunshade in orbit around

Venus to cool the surface; but it would be enormously

expensive, as wel as having many of the deficiencies of the

dust layer. However, if the temperatures could be lowered

sufficiently, the CO2 in the atmosphere would rain out.

There would be a transitional time of CO2 oceans on

Venus. If those oceans could be covered over to prevent re-

evaporation—for example, with water oceans made by

melting a large, icy moon transported from the outer Solar

System—then the CO2 might conceivably be sequestered

away, and Venus converted into a water (or low-fizz seltzer)

planet. Ways have also been suggested to convert the

CO2 into carbonate rock.

Thus al proposals for terraforming Venus are stil brute-

force, inelegant, and absurdly expensive. The desired

planetary metamorphosis may be beyond our reach for a

very long time, even if we thought it was desirable and

responsible. The Asian colonization of Venus that Jack

Wil iamson imagined may have to be redirected

somewhere else.

MARS: For Mars we have just the opposite problem.

There's not enough greenhouse effect. The planet is a

frozen desert. But the fact that Mars seems to have had

abundant rivers, lakes, and perhaps even oceans 4 bil ion

years ago—at a time when the Sun was less bright than it

is today—makes you wonder if there's solve natural

instability in the Martian climate, something on hair trigger

that once released would al by itself return the planet to its

ancient clement state. (Let's note from the start that doing

so would destroy Martian landforms that hold key data on

the past—especial y the laminated polar terrain.)

As we know very wel from Earth and Venus, carbon

dioxide is a greenhouse gas. There are carbonate minerals

found on Mars, and dry ice in one of the polar caps. They

could be converted into CO2 gas. But to make enough of a

greenhouse effect to generate comfortable temperatures

on Mars would require the entire surface of the planet to be

plowed up and processed to a depth of kilometers. Apart

from the daunting obstacles in practical engineering that

this represents—fusion power or no fusion power—and the

inconvenience

to

whatever

self-contained,

closed

inconvenience

to

whatever

self-contained,

closed

ecological systems humans had already established on the

planet it would also constitute the irresponsible destruction

of a unique scientific resource and database, the Martian

surface.

What about other greenhouse gases? Alternatively, we

might take chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs or HCFCs) to Mars

after manufacturing them on Earth. These are artificial

substances that, so far as we know, are found nowhere

else in the Solar System. We can certainly imagine

manufacturing enough CFCs on Earth to warm Mars,

because by accident in a few decades with present

technology on Earth we've managed to synthesize enough

to contribute to global warming on our planet.

Transportation to Mars would be expensive, though: Even

usi ng Saturn V- or Energiya- class boosters , it would

require at least a launch a day for a century. But perhaps

they could be manufactured from fluorine-containing

minerals on Mars.

There is, in addition, a serious drawback: On Mars as on

Earth, abundant CFCs would prevent formation of an ozone

layer. CFCs might bring Martian temperatures into a

clement range, but guarantee that the solar ultraviolet

hazard would remain extremely serious. Perhaps the solar

ultraviolet light could be absorbed by an atmospheric layer

of pulverized asteroidal or surface debris injected in

careful y titrated amounts above the CFCs. But now we're

in the troubling circumstance of having to deal with

propagating side effects, each of which requires its own

large-scale technological solution.

A third possible greenhouse gas for warming Mars is

ammonia (NH3). Only a little ammonia would be enough to

warm the Martian surface to above the freezing point of

water. In principle, this might be done by special y

engineered microorganisms that would convert Martian

atmospheric N2 to NH3 as some microbes do on Earth,

but do it under Martian conditions. Or the same conversion

might be done in special factories. Alternatively, the

nitrogen required could be carried to Mars from elsewhere

in the Solar System. (N2 is the principal constituent in the

atmospheres of both Earth and Titan.) Ultraviolet light would

convert ammonia back into N2 in about 30 years, so there

would have to be a continuous resupply of NH3.

A judicious combination of CO2, CFC, and NH3

greenhouse effects on Mars looks as if it might be able to

bring surface temperatures close enough to the freezing

point of water for the second phase of Martian terraforming

to begin—temperatures rising due to the pressure of

substantial water vapor in the air, widespread production of

O2 by genetical y engineered plants, and fine-tuning the

surface environment. Microbes and larger plants and

animals could be established on Mars before the overal

environment was suitable for unprotected human settlers.

Terraforming Mars is plainly much easier than

terraforming Venus. But it is stil very expensive by present

standards, and environmental y destructive. If there were

sufficient justification, though, perhaps the terraforming of

Mars could be under way by the twenty-second century.

THE MOONS OF JUPITER AND SATURN: Terraforming

the satel ites of the Jovian planets presents varying

degrees of difficulty. Perhaps the easiest to contemplate is

Titan. It already has an atmosphere, made mainly of N2

like the Earth's, and is much closer to terrestrial

atmospheric pressures than either Venus or Mars.

Moreover, important greenhouse gases, such as NH3 and

H20, are almost certainly frozen out on its surface.

Manufacture of initial greenhouse gases that do not freeze

out at present Titan temperatures plus direct warming of the

surface by nuclear fusion could, it seems, be the key early

steps to one day terraform Titan.



IF THERE WERE A COMPELLING REASON for terraforming other

worlds, this greatest of engineering projects might be

feasible on the timescale we've been describing—certainly

for asteroids, possibly for Mars, Titan, and other moons of

the outer planets, and probably not for Venus. Pol ack and I

recognized that there are those who feel a powerful

attraction to the idea of rendering other worlds in the Solar

System suitable for human habitation—in establishing

observatories, exploratory bases, communities, and

homesteads there. Because of its pioneering history, this

may be a particularly natural and attractive idea in the

United States.

In any case, massive alteration of the environments of

other worlds can be done competently and responsibly only

when we have a much better understanding of those worlds

than is available today. Advocates of terraforming must first

become advocates of the long-term and thorough scientific

exploration of other worlds.

Perhaps when we real y understand the difficulties of

terraforming, the costs or the environmental penalties wil

prove too steep, and we wil lower our sights to domed or

subsurface cities or other local, closed ecological systems,

greatly improved versions of Biosphere I , on other worlds.

Perhaps we wil abandon the dream of converting the

surfaces of other worlds to something approaching the

Earth's. Or perhaps there are much more elegant, cost-

effective, and environmental y responsible ways of

terraforming that we have not yet imagined.

But if we are seriously to pursue the matter, certain

questions ought to be asked: Given that any terraforming

scheme entails a balance of benefits against costs, how

certain must we be that key scientific information wil not

thereby be destroyed before proceeding? How much

understanding of the world in question do we need before

planetary engineering can be relied upon to produce the

desired end state? Can we guarantee a long-term human

commitment to maintain and replenish an engineered

world, when human political institutions are so short lived? If

a world is even conceivably inhabited—perhaps only by

microorganisms—do humans have a right to alter it? What

is our responsibility to preserve the worlds of the Solar

System in their present wilderness states for future

generations-who may contemplate uses that today we are

too ignorant to foresee? These questions may perhaps be

encapsulated into a final question: Can we, who have made

such a mess of this world, be trusted with others?

It is just conceivable that some of the techniques that

might eventual y terraform other worlds might be applied to

ameliorate the damage we have done to this one.

Considering the relative urgencies, a useful indication of

when the human species is ready to consider terraforming

seriously is when we have put our own world right. We can

consider it a test of the depth of our understanding and our

commitment. The first step in engineering the Solar System

is to guarantee the habitability of the Earth.

Then we'l be ready to spread out to asteroids, comets,

Mars, the moons of the outer Solar System, and beyond.

Jack Wil iamson 's prediction that this wil begin to come

about by the twenty-second century may not be far off the

mark.

THE NOTION OF OUR DESCENDANTS living and working on

other worlds, and even moving some of them around

for their convenience, seems the most extravagant

science fiction. Be realistic, a voice inside my head

counsels. But this is realistic. We're on the cusp of the

technology, near the midpoint between impossible and

routine. It's easy to be conflicted about it. If we don't do

something awful to ourselves in the interim, in another

century terraforming may seem no more impossible

than a human-tended space station does today.

I think the experience of living on other worlds is

bound to change us. Our descendants, born and

raised elsewhere, wil natural y begin to owe primary

loyalty to the worlds of their birth, whatever affection

they retain for the Earth. Their physical needs, their

methods of supplying those needs, their technologies,

and their social structures wil al have to be different.

A blade of grass is a commonplace on Earth; it

would be a miracle on Mars. Our descendants on Mars

wil know the value of a patch of green. And if a blade

of grass is priceless, what is the value of a human

being? The American revolutionary Tom Paine, in

describing his contemporaries, had thoughts along

these lines:

The wants which necessarily accompany the

cultivation of a wilderness produced among them

a state of society which countries long harassed

by the quarrels and intrigues of governments had

neglected to cherish. In such a situation man

becomes what he ought to be. He sees his

species . . . as kindred.

Having seen at first hand a procession of barren and

desolate worlds, it wil be natural for our spacefaring

descendants to cherish life. Having learned something

from the tenure of our species on Earth, they may wish

to apply those lessons to other worlds—to spare

generations to come the avoidable suffering that their

ancestors were obliged to endure, and to draw upon

our experience and our mistakes as we begin our

open-ended evolution into space.

C H A P T

E R 2 0

DARKNESS

Far away, hidden from the eyes of daylight, there

are watchers in the skies.





—EURIPIDES,

THE

BACCHAE

/CA. 406 B.C.)





As children, we fear the dark. Anything might be out. here.

The unknown troubles us. Ironical y, it is our fate to live in

the dark. This unexpected finding of science is only about

three centuries old. Head out from the Earth in any direction

you choose, and—after an initial flash of blue and a longer

wait while the Sun fades—you are surrounded by

blackness, punctuated only here and there by the faint and

distant stars.

Even after we are grown, the darkness retains its

power to frighten us. And so there are those who say we

should not inquire too closely into who else might be living

in that darkness. Better not to know, they say.

There are 400 bil ion stars in the Milky Way Galaxy. Of

this immense multitude, could it be that our humdrum Sun is

the only one with an inhabited planet? Maybe. Maybe the

origin of life or intel igence is exceedingly improbable. Or

maybe civilizations arise al the time, but wipe themselves

out as soon as they are able.

Or, here and there, peppered across space, orbiting

other suns, maybe there are worlds something like our own,

on which other beings gaze up and wonder as we do about

who else lives in the dark. Could the Milky Way be rippling

with life and intel igence—worlds cal ing out to worlds—

while we on Earth are alive at the critical moment when we

first decide to listen?

Our species has discovered a way to communicate

through the dark, to transcend immense distances. No

means of communication is faster or cheaper or reaches

out farther. It's cal ed radio.

After bil ions of years of biological evolution—on their

planet and ours—an alien civilization cannot be in

technological lockstep with us. There have been humans for

more than twenty thousand centuries, but we've had radio

only for about one century. If alien civilizations are behind

us, they're likely to be too far behind to have radio. And if

they're ahead of us, they're likely to be far ahead of us.

Think of the technical advances on our world over just the

last few centuries. What is for us technological y difficult or

impossible, what might seem to us like magic, might for

them be trivial y easy. They might use other, very advanced

means to communicate with their peers, but they would

know about radio as an approach to newly emerging

civilizations. Even with no more than our level of technology

at the transmitting and receiving ends, we could

communicate today across much of the Galaxy. They

should be able to do much better.

If they exist.

But our fear of the dark rebels. The idea of alien

beings troubles us. We conjure up objections:

"It's too expensive." But, in its ful est modern

technological expression, it costs less than one attack

helicopter a year.

"We'll never understand what they're saying." But,

because the message -is transmitted by radio, we and they

must have radio physics, radio astronomy, and radio

technology in common. The laws of Nature are the same

everywhere; so science itself provides a means and

language of communication even between very different

kinds of beings—provided they both have science. Figuring

out the message, if we're fortunate enough to receive one,

may be much easier than acquiring it.

"It would be demoralizing to learn that our science is

primitive." But by the standards of the next few centuries, at

least some of our present science wil be considered

primitive, extraterrestrials or no extraterrestrials. (So wil

some of our present politics, ethics, economics, and

religion.) To go beyond present science is one of. the chief

goals of science. Serious students are not commonly

plunged into fits of despair on turning the pages of a

textbook and discovering that some further topic is known

to the author but not yet to the student. Usual y the students

struggle a little, acquire the new knowledge, and, fol owing

an ancient human tradition, continue to turn the pages.

"All through history advanced civilizations have

ruined civilizations just slightly more backward." Certainly.

But malevolent aliens, should they exist, wil not discover

our existence from the fact that we listen. The search

programs

only

receive;

they

do

not

send.[††††††††††]





THE DEBATE IS, for the moment, moot. We are now, on an

unprecedented scale, listening for radio signals from

possible other civilizations in the depths of space. Alive

today is the first generation of scientists to interrogate the

darkness. Conceivably it might also be the last generation

before contact is made—and this the last moment before

we discover that someone in the darkness is cal ing out to

us.

This quest is cal ed the Search for Extraterrestrial

Intel igence (SETI). Let me describe how far we've come.

The first SETI program was carried out by Frank Drake

at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in

Greenbank, West Virginia, in 1960. He listened to two

nearby Sun-like stars for two weeks at one particular

frequency. ("Nearby" is a relative term: The nearest was 12

light-years—70 tril ion miles—away.)

Almost at the moment Drake pointed the radio telescope

and turned the system on, he picked up a very strong

signal. Was it a message from alien beings? Then it went

away. If the signal disappears, you can't scrutinize it. You

can't see if, because of the Earth's rotation, it moves with

the sky. If it's not repeatable, you've learned almost nothing

from it—it might be terrestrial radio interference, or a failure

of your amplifier or detector . . . or an alien signal.

Unrepeatable data, no matter how il ustrious the scientist

reporting them, are not worth much.

Weeks later, the signal was detected again. It turned

out to be a military aircraft broadcasting on an unauthorized

frequency. Drake reported negative results. But in science

a negative result is not at al the same thing as a failure. His

great achievement was to show that modern technology is

ful y able to listen for signals from hypothetical civilizations

on the planets of other stars.

Since then there've been a number of attempts, often on

time borrowed from other radio telescope observing

programs, and almost never for longer than a few months.

There've been some more false alarms, at Ohio State, in

Arecibo, Puerto Rico, in France, Russia, and elsewhere,

but nothing that could pass muster with the world scientific

community.

Meanwhile, the technology for detection has been getting

cheaper; the sensitivity keeps improving; the scientific

respectability of SETI has continued to grow; and even

NASA and Congress have become a little less afraid to

support it. Diverse, complementary search strategies are

possible and necessary. It was clear years ago that if the

trend continued, the technology for a comprehensive SETI

effort would eventual y fal within the reach even of private

organizations (or wealthy individuals); and sooner or later,

the government would be wil ing to support a major

program. After 30 years of work, for some of us it's been

later rather than sooner. But at last the time has come.



THE PLANETARY SOCIETY-a nonprofit membership organization

that Bruce Murray, then the Director of JPL, and I founded

in 1980—is devoted to planetary exploration and the

search for extraterrestrial life. Paul Horowitz, a physicist at

Harvard University, had made a number of important

innovations for SETI and was eager to try them out. If we

could find the money to get him started, we thought we

could continue to support the program by donations from

our members.

In 1983 Ann Druyan and I suggested to the filmmaker

Steven Spielberg that this was an ideal project for him to

support. Breaking with Hol ywood tradition, he had in two

wildly successful movies conveyed the idea that

extraterrestrial beings might not be hostile and dangerous.

Spielberg agreed. With his initial support through The

Planetary Society, Project META began.

META

is

an

acronym

for

"Megachannel

ExtraTerrestrial Assay." The single frequency of Drake's

first system grew to 8.4 mil ion. But each channel, each

"station," we tune to has an exceptional y narrow frequency

range. There are no known processes out among the stars

and galaxies that can generate such sharp radio "lines." If

we pick up anything fal ing into so narrow a channel, it must,

we think, be a token of intel igence and technology.

What's more, the Earth turns—which means that any

distant radio source wil have a sizable apparent motion,

like the rising and setting of the stars. Just as the steady

tone of a car's horn dips as it drives by, so any authentic

extraterrestrial radio source wil exhibit a steady drift in

frequency due to the Earth's rotation. In contrast, any source

of radio interference at the Earth's surface wil be rotating at

the same speed as the META receiver. META's listening

frequencies are continuously changed to compensate for

the Earth's rotation, so that any narrow-band Signals from

the sky wil always appear in a single channel. But any radio

interference down here on Earth wil give itself away by

racing through adjacent channels.

The META radio telescope at Harvard, Massachusetts,

is 26 meters (84 feet) in diameter. Each day, as the Earth

rotates the telescope beneath the sky, a swath of stars

narrower than the ful moon is swept out and examined.

Next day, it's an adjacent swath. Over a year, al of the

northern sky and part of the southern is observed. An

identical system, also sponsored by The Planetary Society,

is in operation just outside Buenos Aires, Argentina, to

examine the southern sky. So together the two META

systems have been exploring the entire sky.

The radio telescope, gravitational y glued to the spinning

Earth, looks at any given star for about two minutes. Then

it's on to the next. 8.4 mil ion channels sounds like a lot, but

remember, each channel is very narrow. Al of them

together constitute only a few parts in 100,000 of the

available radio spectrum. So we have to park our 8.4

mil ion channels somewhere in the radio spectrum for each

year of observation, near some frequency that an alien

civilization, knowing nothing about us, might nevertheless

conclude we're listening to.

Hydrogen is by far the most abundant kind of atom in the

Universe. It's distributed in clouds and as diffuse gas

throughout interstel ar space. When it acquires energy, it

releases some of it by giving off radio waves at a precise

frequency of 1420.405751768 megahertz. (One hertz

means the crest and trough of a wave arriving at your

detection instrument each second. So 1420 megahertz

means 1.420 billion waves entering your detector every

second. Since the wavelength of light is just the speed of

light divided by the frequency of the wave, 1420 megahertz

corresponds to a wavelength of 21 centimeters.) Radio

astronomers anywhere in the Galaxy wil be studying the

Universe at 1420 megahertz and can anticipate that other

radio astronomers, no matter how different they may look,

wil do the same.

It's as if someone told you that there's only one station on

your home radio set's frequency band, but that no one

knows its frequency. Oh yes, one other thing: Your set's

frequency dial, kith its thin marker you adjust by turning a

knob, happens to reach from the Earth to the Moon. To

search systematical y through this vast radio spectrum,

patiently turning the knob, is going to be very time-

consuming. Your problem is to set the dial correctly from

the beginning, to choose the right frequency. If you can

correctly guess what frequencies that extraterrestrials are

broadcasting to us on—the "magic" frequencies—then you

can save yourself much time and trouble. These are the

sorts of reasons that we first listened, as Drake did, at

frequencies near 1420 megahertz, the hydrogen "magic"

frequency.

Horowitz and I have published detailed results from five

years of ful -time searching with Project META and two

years of fol ow-up. We can't report that we found a signal

from alien beings. But we did find something puzzling,

something that for me in quiet moments, every now and

then, raises goose bumps:

Of course, there's a background level of radio noise from

Earth—radio and television stations, aircraft, portable

telephones, nearby and more distant spacecraft. Also, as

with al radio receivers, the longer you wait, the more likely

it is that there'l be some random fluctuation in the

electronics so strong that it generates a spurious signal. So

we ignore anything that isn't much louder than the

background.

Any strong narrow-band signal that remains in a single

channel we take very seriously. As it logs in the data, META

automatical y tel s the human operators to pay attention to

certain signals. Over five years we made some 60 tril ion

observations at various frequencies, while examining the

entire accessible sky. A few dozen signals survive the

cul ing. These are subjected to further scrutiny, and almost

al of them are rejected-for example, because an error has

been found by fault-detection microprocessors that

examine the signal-detection microprocessors.

What's left—the strongest candidate signals after three

surveys of the sky—are 11 "events." They satisfy al but one

of our criteria for a genuine alien signal. But the one failed

criterion is supremely important: Verifiability. We've never

been able to find any of them again. We look back at that

part of the sky three minutes later and there's nothing there.

We look again the fol owing day: nothing. Examine it a year

later, or seven years later, and stil there's nothing.

It seems unlikely that every signal we get from alien

civilizations would turn itself off a couple of minutes after we

begin listening, and never repeat. (How would they know

we're paying attention?) But, just possibly, this is the effect

of twinkling. Stars twinkle because parcels of turbulent air

are moving across the line of sight between the star and us.

Sometimes these air parcels act as a lens and cause the

light rays from a given star to converge a little, making it

momentarily brighter. Similarly, astronomical radio sources

may also twinkle—owing to clouds of electrical y charged

(or "ionized") gas in the great near-vacuum between the

stars. We observe this routinely with pulsars.

Imagine a radio signal that's a little below the strength

that we could otherwise detect on Earth. Occasional y the

signal wil by chance be temporarily focused, amplified, and

signal wil by chance be temporarily focused, amplified, and

brought within the detectability range of our radio

telescopes. The interesting thing is that the lifetimes of such

brightening, predicted from the physics of the interstel ar

gas, are a few minutes—and the chance of reacquiring the

signal is smal . We should real y be pointing steadily at

these coordinates in the sky, watching them for months.

Despite the fact that none of these signals repeats,

there's an additional fact about them that, every time I think

about it, sends a chil down my spine: 8 of the 11 best

candidate signals lie in or near the plane of the Milky Way

Galaxy. The five strongest are in the constel ations

Cassiopeia, Monoceros, Hydra, and two in Sagittarius—in

the approximate direction of the center of the Galaxy. The

Milky Way is a flat, wheel-like col ection of gas and dust

and stars. Its flatness is why we see it as a band of diffuse

light across the night sky. That's where almost al the stars

in our galaxy are. If our candidate signals real y were radio

interference from Earth or some undetected glitch in the

detection electronics, we shouldn't see them preferential y

when we're pointing at the Milky Way.

But maybe we had an especial y unlucky and misleading

run of statistics. The probability that this correlation with the

galactic plane is due merely to chance is less than half a

percent. Imagine a wal -size map of the sky, ranging from

the North Star at the top to the fainter stars toward which

the Earth's south pole points at the bottom. Snaking across

this wal map are the irregular boundaries of the Milky Way.

Now suppose that you were blindfolded and asked to throw

five darts at random at the map (with much of the southern

sky, inaccessible from Massachusetts, declared off limits).

You'd have to throw the set of five darts more than 200

times before, by accident, you got them to fal as closely

within the precincts of the Milky Way as the five strongest

META signals did. Without repeatable signals, though,

there's no way we can conclude that we've actual y found

extraterrestrial intel igence.

Or maybe the events we've found are caused by some

new kind of astrophysical phenomenon, something that

nobody has thought of yet, by which not civilizations, but

stars or gas clouds (or something) that do lie in the plane of

the Milky Way emit strong signals in bafflingly narrow

frequency bands.

Let's permit ourselves, though, a moment of extravagant

speculation. Let's imagine that all our surviving events are

in fact due to radio beacons of other civilizations. Then we

can estimate—from how little time we've spent watching

each piece of sky—how many such transmitters there are

in the entire Milky Way. The answer is something

approaching a mil ion. If randomly strewn through space,

the nearest of them would be a few hundred light years

away, too far for them to have picked up our own TV or

radar signals yet. They would not know for another few

centuries that a technical civilization has emerged on Earth.

The Galaxy would be pulsing with life and intel igence, but—

unless they're busily exploring huge numbers of obscure

star systems—whol y oblivious of what has been happening

down here lately. A few centuries from now, after they do

hear from us, things might get very interesting. Fortunately,

we'd have many generations to prepare.

If, on the other hand, none of our candidate signals is an

authentic alien radio beacon, then we're forced to the

conclusion that very few civilizations are broadcasting,

maybe none, at least at our magic frequencies and strongly

enough for us to hear:

Consider a civilization like our own, but which dedicated

al its available power (about 10 tril ion watts) to

broadcasting a beacon signal at one of our magic

frequencies and to al directions in space. The META

results would then imply that there are no such civilizations

out to 25 light-years—a volume that encompasses perhaps

a dozen Sun-like stars. This is not a very stringent limit. If, in

contrast, that civilization were broadcasting directly at our

position in space, using an antenna no more advanced

than the Arecibo Observatory, then if META has found

nothing, it fol ows that there are no such civilizations

anywhere in the Milky Way Galaxy—out of 400 bil ion stars,

not one. But even assuming they would want to, how would

they know to transmit in our direction?

Now consider, at the opposite technological extreme, a

very

advanced

civilization

omnidirectional y

and

extravagantly broadcasting at a power level 10 tril ion times

greater (1026 watts, the entire energy output of a star like

the Sun). Then, if the META results are negative, we can

conclude not only that there are no such civilizations in the

Milky Way, but none out to 70 mil ion light-years—none in

M31, the nearest galaxy like our own, none in M33, or the

Fornax system, or M81, or the Whirlpool Nebula, or

Centaurus A, or the Virgo cluster of galaxies, or the nearest

Seyfert galaxies; none among any of the hundred tril ion

stars in thousands of nearby galaxies. Stake through its

heart or not, the geocentric conceit stirs again.

Of course, it might be a token not of intel igence but of

stupidity to pour so much energy into interstel ar (and

intergalactic) communication. Perhaps they have good

reasons not to hail al comers. Or perhaps they don't care

about civilizations as backward as we are. But stil —not

one civilization in a hundred tril ion stars broadcasting with

such power on such a frequency? If the META results are

negative, we have set an instructive limit—but whether on

the abundance of very advanced civilizations or their

communications strategy we have no way of knowing. Even

if META has found nothing, a broad middle range remains

open—of abundant civilizations, more advanced than we

and broadcasting omnidirectional y at magic frequencies.

We would not have heard from them yet.

ON OCTOBER 12, 1992—auspiciously or otherwise the 500th

anniversary of the "discovery" of America by Christopher

Columbus—NASA turned on its new SETI program. At a

radio telescope in the Mojave Desert, a search was

initiated intended to cover the entire sky systematical y—

like META, making no guesses about which stars are more

likely, but greatly expanding the frequency coverage. At the

Arecibo Observatory, an even more sensitive NASA study

began that concentrated on promising nearby star systems.

When ful y operational, the NASA searches would have

been able to detect much fainter signals than META, and

look for kinds of signals that META could not.

The META experience reveals a thicket of

background

static

and

radio

interference.

Quick

reobservation and confirmation of the signal—special y at

other, independent radio telescopes—is the key to being

sure. Horowitz and I gave NASA scientists the coordinates

of our fleeting and enigmatic events. Perhaps they would

be able to confirm and clarify our results. The NASA

program was also developing new technology, stimulating

ideas, and exciting schoolchildren. In the eyes of many it

was wel worth the $10 mil ion a year being spent on it. But

almost exactly a year after authorizing it, Congress pul ed

the plug on NASA's SETI program. It cost too much, they

said. The post-Cold War U.S. defense budget is some

30,000 times larger.

The chief argument of the principal opponent of the

NASA SETI program—Senator Richard Bryan of Nevada

—was this [from the Congressional Record for September

22, 1993]:

So far, the NASA SETI Program has found

nothing. In fact, al the decades of SETI research

have found no confirmable signs of extraterrestrial

life.

Even with the current NASA version of SETI, I

do not think many of its scientists would be wil ing

to guarantee that we are likely to see any tangible

results in the [foreseeable] future . . .

Scientific research rarely, if ever, offers

guarantees of success—and I understand that—

and the ful benefits of such research are often

unknown until very late in the process. And I

accept that, as wel .

In the case of SETI, however, the chances of

success are so remote, and the likely benefits of

the program are so limited, that there is little

justification for 12 mil ion taxpayer dol ars to be

expended for this program.

But how, before we have found extraterrestrial

intel igence, can we "guarantee" that we wil find it? How,

on the other hand, can we know that the chances of

success are "remote"? And if we find extraterrestrial

intel igence, are the benefits real y likely to be "so limited"?

As in al great exploratory ventures, we do not know what

we wil find and we don't know the probability of finding it. If

we did, we would not have to look.

SETI is one of those search programs irritating to those

who want wel -defined cost/benefit ratios. Whether ETI can

be found; how long it would take to find it; and what it would

cost to do so are al unknown. The benefits might be

enormous, but we can't real y be sure of that either. It would

of course be foolish to spend a major fraction of the

national treasure on such ventures, but I wonder if

civilizations cannot be calibrated by whether they pay some

attention to trying to solve the great problems.

Despite these setbacks, a dedicated band of scientists

and engineers, centered at the SETI Institute in Palo Alto,

California, has decided to go ahead, government or no

government. NASA has given them permission to use the

equipment already paid for; captains of the electronics

industry have donated a few mil ion dol ars; at least one

appropriate radio telescope is available; and the initial

stages of this grandest of al SETI programs is on track. If it

can demonstrate that a useful sky survey is possible without

being swamped by background noise—and especial y if,

as is very likely from the META experience, there are

unexplained candidate signals-perhaps Congress wil

change its mind once more and fund the project.

Meanwhile, Paul Horowitz has come up with a new

program—different from META, different from what NASA

was doing—cal ed BETA. BETA stands for "Bil ion-channel

ExtraTerrestrial

Assay."

It

combines

narrow-band

sensitivity, wide frequency coverage, and a clever way to

verify signals as they're detected. If The Planetary Society

can find the additional support, this system—much cheaper

than the former NASA program—should be on the air soon.

WOULD I LIKE TO BELIEVE that with META we've detected

transmissions from other civilizations out there in the dark,

sprinkled through the vast Milky Way Galaxy? You bet. After

decades of wondering and studying this problem, of course

I would. To me, such a discovery would be thril ing. It would

change everything. We would be hearing from other beings,

independently evolved over bil ions of years, viewing the

Universe perhaps very differently, probably much smarter,

certainly not human. How much do they know that we don't?

For me, no signals, no one cal ing out to us is a

depressing prospect. "Complete silence," said Jean-

Jacques Rousseau in a different context, "induces

melancholy; it is an image of death." But I'm with Henry

David Thoreau: "Why should I feel lonely? Is not our planet

in the Milky Way?"

The realization that such beings exist and that, as the

evolutionary process requires, they must be very different

from us, would have a striking implication: Whatever

differences divide us down here on Earth are trivial

compared to the differences between any of us and any of

them. Maybe it's a long shot, but the discovery of

extraterrestrial intel igence might play a role in unifying our

squabbling and divided planet. It would be the last of the

Great Demotions, a rite of passage for our species and a

transforming event in the ancient quest to discover our

place in the Universe.

In our fascination with SETI, we might be tempted, even

without good evidence, to succumb to belief but this would

be self-indulgent and foolish. We must surrender our

skepticism only in the face of rock-solid evidence. Science

demands a tolerance for ambiguity. Where we are ignorant,

we withhold belief. Whatever annoyance the uncertainty

engenders serves a higher purpose: It drives us to

accumulate better data. This attitude is the difference

between science and so much else. Science offers little in

the way of cheap thril s. The standards of evidence are

strict. But when fol owed they al ow us to see far,

il uminating even a great darkness.

C H A P

T E R 21

TO THE

SKY!

The stairs of the sky are let down for him

that he may ascend thereon to

heaven. O gods, put your arms under the king:

raise him, lift him to the sky.

To the sky! To the sky!

—HYMN FOR A DEAD

PHARAOH (EGYPT, CA. 2600 B.C.)

When my grandparents were children, the electric light,

the automobile, the airplane, and the radio were Stupefying

technological advances, the wonders of the age. You might

hear wild stories about them, but you could not find a single

exemplar in that little vil age in Austria-Hungary, near the

banks of the river Bug. But in that same time, around the

turn of the last century, there were two men who foresaw

other,

far

more

ambitious,

inventions—Konstantin

Tsiolkovsky, the theoretician, a nearly deaf schoolteacher in

the obscure Russian town of Kaluga, and Robert Goddard,

the engineer, a professor at an equal y obscure American

col ege in Massachusetts. They dreamt of using rockets to

journey to the planets and the stars. Step by step, they

worked out the fundamental physics and many of the

details. Gradual y, their machines took shape. Ultimately,

their dream proved infectious.

In their time, the very idea was considered disreputable,

or even a symptom of some obscure derangement.

Goddard found that merely mentioning a voyage to other

worlds subjected him to ridicule, and he dared not publish

or even discuss in public his long-term vision of flights to

the stars. As teenagers, both had epiphanal visions of

spaceflight that never left them. "I stil have dreams in which

I fly up to the stars in my machine," Tsiolkovsky wrote in

middle age. "It is difficult to work al on your own for many

years, in adverse conditions without a gleam of hope,

without any help." Many of his contemporaries thought he

was truly mad. Those who knew physics better than

Tsiolkovsky and Goddard—including The New York Times

in a dismissive editorial not retracted until the eve of Apollo

11—insisted that rockets could not work in a vacuum, that

the Moon and the planets were forever beyond human

reach.

A generation later, inspired by Tsiolkovsky and Goddard,

Wernher von Braun was constructing the first rocket

capable of reaching the edge of space, the V-2. But in one

of those ironies with which the twentieth century is replete,

von Braun was building it for the Nazis—as an instrument of

indiscriminate slaughter of civilians, as a "vengeance

weapon" for Hitler, the rocket factories staffed with slave

labor, untold human suffering exacted in the construction of

every booster, and von Braun himself made an officer in the

SS. He was aiming at the Moon, he joked

unselfconsciously, but hit London instead.

Another generation later, building on the work of

Tsiolkovsky and Goddard, extending von Braun's

technological genius, we were up there in space, silently

circumnavigating the Earth, treading the ancient and

desolate lunar surface. Our machines—increasingly

competent and autonomous—were spreading through the

Solar System, discovering new worlds, examining them

closely, searching for life, comparing them with Earth.

This is one reason that in the long astronomical

perspective there is something truly epochal about "now"—

which we can define as the few centuries centered on the

year you're reading this book. And there's a second

reason: This is the first moment in the history of our planet

when any species, by its own voluntary actions, has

become a danger to itself—as wel as to vast numbers of

others. Let me recount the ways:

• We've been burning fossil fuels for hundreds of

thousands of years. By the 1960s, there were so

many of us burning wood, coal, oil, and natural

gas on so large a scale, that scientists began to

worry about the increasing greenhouse effect; the

dangers of global warming began slowly slipping

into public consciousness.

• CFCs were invented in the 1920s and 1930s; in

1974 they were discovered to attack the

protective ozone layer. Fifteen years later a

worldwide ban on their production was going into

effect.

• Nuclear weapons were invented in 1945. It took

until 1983 before the global consequences of

thermonuclear war were understood. By 1992,

large numbers of warheads were being

dismantled.

• The first asteroid was discovered in 1801. More

or less serious proposals to move them around

were floated beginning in the 1980s. Recognition

of the potential dangers of asteroid deflection

technology fol owed shortly after.

• Biological warfare has been with us for

centuries, but its deadly mating with molecular

biology has occurred only lately.

• We humans have already precipitated

extinctions of species on a scale unprecedented

since the end of the Cretaceous Period. But only

in the last decade has the magnitude of these

extinctions become clear, and the possibility

raised that in our ignorance of the

interrelations of life on Earth we may be

endangering our own future.

Look at the dates on this list and consider the range of

new technologies currently under development. Is it not

likely that other dangers of our own making are yet to be

discovered, some perhaps even more serious?

In the littered field of discredited self-congratulatory

chauvinisms, there is only one that seems to hold up, one

sense in which we are special: Due to our own actions or

inactions, and the misuse of our technology, we live at an

extraordinary moment, for the Earth at least—the first time

that a species has become able to wipe itself out. But this

is also, we may note, the first time that a species has

become able to journey to the planets and the stars. The

two times, brought about by the same technology, coincide

—a few centuries in the history of a 4.5-bil ion-year-old

planet. If you were somehow dropped down on the Earth

randomly at any moment in the past (or future), the chance

of arriving at this critical moment would be less than 1 in 10

mil ion. Our leverage on the future is high just now.

It might be a familiar progression, transpiring on

many worlds—a planet, newly formed, placidly revolves

around its star; life slowly forms; a kaleidoscopic

procession of creatures evolves; intel igence emerges

which, at least up to a point, confers enormous survival

value; and then technology is invented. It dawns on them

that there are such things as laws of Nature, that these laws

can be revealed by experiment, and that knowledge of

these laws can be made both to save and to take lives,

both on unprecedented scales. Science, they recognize,

grants immense powers. In a flash, they create world-

altering contrivances. Some planetary civilizations see their

way through, place limits on what may and what must not be

done, and safely pass through the time of perils. Others are

not so lucky or so prudent, perish.

Since, in the long run, every planetary society wil be

endangered by impacts from space, every surviving

civilization is obliged to become spacefaring—-not

because of exploratory or romantic zeal, but for the most

practical reason imaginable: staying alive. And once you're

out there in space for centuries and mil ennia, moving little

worlds around and engineering planets, your species has

been pried loose from its cradle. If they exist, many other

civilizations

wil

eventual y

venture

far

from

home.[‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡]

A MEANS HAS BEEN OFFERED of estimating how precarious

our circumstances are—remarkably, without in any

way addressing the nature of the hazards. J. Richard

Gott I I is an astrophysicist at Princeton University. He

asks us to adopt a generalized Copernican principle,

something I've described elsewhere as the Principle of

Mediocrity. Chances are that we do not live in a truly

extraordinary time. Hardly anyone ever did. The

probability is high that we're born, live out our days,

and die somewhere in the broad middle range of the

lifetime of our species (or civilization, or nation).

Almost certainly, Gott says, we do not live in first or last

times. So if your species is very young, it fol ows that

it's unlikely to last long—because if it were to last long,

you (and the rest of us alive today) would be

extraordinary in living, proportional y speaking, so near

the beginning.

What then is the projected longevity of our species? Gott

concludes, at the 97.5 percent confidence level, that there

wil be humans for no more than 8 mil ion years. That's his

upper limit, about the same as the average lifetime of many

mammalian species. In that case, our technology neither

harms nor helps. But Gott's lower limit, with the same

claimed reliability, is only 12 years. He wil not give you 40-

to-1 odds that humans wil stil be around by the time

babies now alive become teenagers. In everyday life we try

very hard not to take risks so large, not to board airplanes,

say, with 1 chance in 40 of crashing. We wil agree to

surgery in which 95 percent of patients survive only if our

disease has a greater than 5 percent chance of kil ing us.

Mere 40-to-1 odds on our species surviving another 12

years Would be, if valid, a cause for supreme concern. If

Gott is right, not only may we never be out among the stars;

there's a fair chance we may not be around long enough

even to make the first footfal on another planet.

To me, this argument has a strange, vaporish quality.

Knowing nothing about our species except how old it is, we

make numerical estimates, claimed to be highly reliable,

about its future prospects. How? We go with the winners.

Those who have been around are likely to stay around.

Newcomers tend to disappear. The only assumption is the

quite plausible one that there is nothing special about the

moment at which we inquire into the matter. So why is the

argument unsatisfying? Is it just that we are appal ed by its

implications?

Something like the Principle of Mediocrity must have very

broad applicability. But we are not so ignorant as to

imagine that everything is mediocre. There is something

special about our time—not just the temporal chauvinism

that those who reside in any epoch doubtless feel, but

something, as outlined above, clearly unique and strictly

relevant to our species' future chances: This is the first time

that (a) our exponentiating technology has reached the

precipice of self-destruction, but also the first time that (b)

we can postpone or avoid destruction by going somewhere

else, somewhere off the Earth.

These two clusters of capabilities, (a) and (b), make our

time extraordinary in directly contradictory ways—which

both (a) strengthen and (b) weaken Gott's argument. I don't

know how to predict whether the new destructive

technologies wil hasten, more than the new spaceflight

technologies wil delay, human extinction. But since never

before have we contrived the means of annihilating

ourselves, and never before have w e developed the

technology for settling other worlds, I think a compel ing

case can be made that our time is extraordinary precisely

in the context of Gott's argument. If this is true, it

significantly increases the margin of error in such estimates

of future longevity. The worst is worse, and the best better:

Our short-term prospects are even bleaker and—if we can

survive the short-term—our long-term chances even

brighter than Gott calculates.

But the former is no more cause for despair than the

latter is for complacency. Nothing forces us to be passive

observers, clucking in dismay as our destiny inexorably

works itself out. If we cannot quite seize fate by the neck,

perhaps we can misdirect it, or mol ify it, or escape it.

Of course we must keep our planet habitable—not on a

leisurely timescale of centuries or mil ennia, but urgently, on

a timescale of decades or even years. This wil involve

changes in government, in industry, in ethics, in economics,

and in religion. We've never done such a thing before,

certainly not on a global scale. It may be too difficult for us.

Dangerous technologies may be too widespread.

Corruption may be too pervasive. Too many leaders may

be focused on the short term rather than the long. There

may be too many quarreling ethnic groups, nation-states,

and ideologies for the right kind of global change to be

instituted. We may be too foolish to perceive even what the

real dangers are, or that much of what we hear about them

is determined by those with a vested interest in minimizing

fundamental change.

However, we humans also have a history of making long-

lasting social change that nearly everyone thought

impossible. Since our earliest days, we've worked not just

for our own advantage but for our children and our

grandchildren. My grandparents and parents did so for me.

We have often, despite our diversity, despite endemic

hatreds, pul ed together to face a common enemy. We

seem, these days, much more wil ing to recognize the

dangers before us than we were even a decade ago. The

newly recognized dangers threaten al of us equal y. No one

can say how it wil turn out down here.

THE MOON WAS WHERE the tree of immortality grew in ancient

Chinese myth. The tree of longevity if not of immortality, it

seems, indeed grows on other worlds. If we were up there

among the planets, if there were self-sufficient human

communities oil many worlds, our species would be

insulated from catastrophe. The depletion of the ultraviolet-

absorbing shield on one world would, if anything, be a

warning to take special care of the shield on another. A

cataclysmic impact on one world would likely leave al the

others untouched. The more of us beyond the Earth, the

greater the diversity of worlds we inhabit, the more varied

the planetary engineering, the greater the range of societal

standards and values—then the safer the human species

wil be.

If you grow up living underground in a world with a

hundredth of an Earth gravity and black skies through the

portals, you have a very different set of perceptions,

interests, prejudices, and predispositions than someone

who lives on the surface of the home planet. Likewise if you

live on the surface of Mars in the throes of terraforming, or

Venus, or Titan. This strategy—breaking up into many

smal er self-propagating groups, each with somewhat

different strengths and concerns, but al marked by local

pride—has been widely employed in the evolution of life on

Earth, and by our own ancestors in particular. It may, in fact,

be key to understanding why we humans are the way we

are.[§§§§§§§§§§] This is the second of the missing

justifications for a permanent human presence in space: to

improve our chances of surviving, not just the catastrophes

we can foresee, but also the ones we cannot. Gott also

argues that establishing human communities on other

worlds may offer us our best chance of beating the odds.

To take out this insurance policy is not very expensive,

not on the scale on which we do things on Earth. It would

not even require doubling the space budgets of the present

spacefaring nations (which, in al cases, are only a smal

fraction of the military budgets and many other voluntary

expenditures that might be considered marginal or even

frivolous). We could soon be setting humans down on near-

Earth asteroids and establishing bases on Mars. We know

how to do it, even with present technology, in less than a

human lifetime. And the technologies wil quickly improve.

We wil get better at going into space.

A serious effort to send humans to other worlds is

relatively so inexpensive on a per annum basis that it

cannot seriously compete with urgent social agendas on

Earth. If we take this path, streams of images from other

worlds wil be pouring down on Earth at the speed of light.

Virtual reality wil make the adventure accessible to mil ions

of stay-on-Earths. Vicarious participation wil be much

more real than at any earlier age of exploration and

discovery. And the more cultures and people it inspires and

excites, the more likely it wil happen.

But by what right, we might ask ourselves, do we inhabit,

alter, and conquer other worlds? If anyone else were living

in the Solar System, this would be an important question. If,

though, there's no one else in this system but us, don't we

have a right to settle it?

Of course, our exploration and homesteading should be

enlightened by a respect for planetary environments and

the scientific knowledge they hold. This is simple prudence.

Of course, exploration and settlement ought to be done

equitably and transnational y, by representatives of the

entire human species. Our past colonial history is not

encouraging in these regards; but this time we are not

motivated by gold or spices or slaves or a zeal to convert

the heathen to the One True Faith, as were the European

explorers of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Indeed,

this is one of the chief reasons we're experiencing such

intermittent progress, so many fits and starts in the manned

space programs of al nations.

Despite al the provincialisms I complained about early in

this book, here I find myself an unapologetic human

chauvinist. If there were other life in this solar system, it

would be in imminent danger because the humans are

coming. In such a case, I might even be persuaded that

safeguarding our species by settling certain other worlds is

offset, in part at least, by the danger we would pose to

everybody else. But as nearly as we can tel , so far at least,

there is no other life in this system, not one microbe.

There's only Earthlife.

In that case, on behalf of Earthlife, I urge that, with ful

knowledge of our limitations, we vastly increase our

knowledge of the Solar System and then begin to settle

other worlds.

These are the missing practical arguments: safeguarding

'the Earth from otherwise inevitable catastrophic impacts

and hedging our bets on the many other threats, known and

unknown, to the environment that sustains us. Without these

arguments, a compel ing case for sending humans to Mars

and elsewhere might be lacking. But with them—and the

buttressing arguments involving science, education,

perspective, and hope—I think a strong case can be made.

If our long-term survival is at stake, we have a basic

responsibility to our species venture to other worlds.

Sailors on a becalmed sea, we sense the stirring of a

breeze.

C H A P T

E R 22

TIPTOEING

THROUGH

THE

MILKY

WAY

I swear by the shelters of the stars (a mighty oath,

if you but knew it) . . .

—

THE

QUR'AN,

SURA 56 (7TH

CENTURY)

Of course, it is

strange to inhabit the earth no longer,

To give up customs

one barely had time to learn . . .

—RAINER MARIA

RILKE, "THE FIRST ELEGY"

(1923)

The prospect of scaling heaven, of ascending to the sky,

of altering other worlds to suit our purposes—no matter

how wel intentioned we may be—sets the warning flags

flying: We remember the human inclination toward

overweening

pride;

we

recal

our

fal ibility

and

misjudgments when presented with powerful new

technologies. We recol ect the story of the Tower of Babel,

a building "whose top may reach unto heaven," and God's

fear .shout our species, that now "nothing wil be restrained

from them which they have imagined to do."

We come upon Psalm 15, which stakes a divine claim to

other worlds: "[T]he heavens are the Lord's, but the Earth

lath he given to the children of men." Or Plato's retel ing of

the Greek analogue of Babel—the tale of Otys and

Ephialtes. They were mortals who "dared to scale heaven."

The gods were faced with a choice. Should they kil the

upstart humans "and annihilate [their] race with

thunderbolts"? On the one Band, "this would be the end of

the sacrifices and worship which mien offered" the gods

and which gods craved. "But, on the other hand, the gods

could not suffer [such] insolence to be unrestrained.'

If, in the long term, though, we have no alternative, if our

choice real y is many worlds or none, we are in need of

other sorts of myths of encouragement. They exist. Many

religions, from Hinduism to Gnostic Christianity to Mormon

doctrine, teach that—as impious as it may sound—it is the

goal of humans to become gods. Or consider a story in the

Jewish Talmud left out of the Book of Genesis. (It is in

doubtful accord with the account of the apple, the Tree of

Knowledge, the Fal , and the expulsion from Eden.) In the

Garden, God tel s Eve and Adam that He has intentional y

left the Universe unfinished. It is the responsibility of

humans, over countless generations, to participate with

God in a "glorious" experiment—" completing the

Creation."

The burden of such a responsibility is heavy, especial y

on so weak and imperfect a species as ours, one with so

unhappy a history. Nothing remotely like "completion" can

be attempted without vastly more knowledge than we have

today. But perhaps, if our very existence is at stake, we wil

find ourselves Able to rise to this supreme chal enge.

ALTHOUGH HE DID NOT quite use any of the arguments of the

preceding chapter, it was Robert Goddard's intuition that

"the navigation of interplanetary space must be effected to

ensure the continuance of the race." Konstantin Tsiolkovsky

made a similar judgment:

There are countless planets, like many island Earths . .

. Man occupies one of them. But why could he not avail

himself of others, and of the might of numberless

suns? . . . When the Sun has exhausted its energy, it

would be logical to leave it and look for another, newly

kindled, star stil in its prime.

This might be done earlier, he suggested, long before the

Sun dies, "by adventurous souls seeking fresh worlds to

conquer."

But as I rethink this whole argument, I'm troubled. Is it too

much Buck Rogers? Does it demand an absurd confidence

in future technology? Does it ignore my own admonitions

about human fal ibility? Surely in the short term it's biased

against technological y less-developed nations. Are there

no practical alternatives that avoid these pitfal s?

Al our self-inflicted environmental problems, al our

weapons of mass destruction are products of science and

technology. So, you might say, let's just back off from

science and technology. Let's admit that these tools are

simply too hot to handle. Let's create a simpler society, in

which no matter how careless or short-sighted we are,

we're incapable of altering the environment on a global or

even on a regional scale. Let's throttle back to a minimal,

agricultural y intensive technology, with stringent controls on

new knowledge. An authoritarian theocracy is a tried-and-

true way to enforce the controls.

Such a world culture is unstable, though, in the long run if

not the short—because of the speed of technological

advance. Human propensities for self-betterment, envy, and

competition wil always be throbbing subsurface;

opportunities for short-term, local advantage wil sooner or

later be seized. Unless there are severe constraints on

thought and action, in a flash we'l be back to where we are

today. So control ed a society must grant great powers to

the elite that does the control ing, inviting flagrant abuse

and eventual rebel ion. It's very hard—once we've seen the

riches, conveniences, and lifesaving medicines that

technology offers—to squelch human inventiveness and

acquisitiveness. And while such a devolution of the global

civilization, were it possible, might conceivably address the

problem of self-inflicted technological catastrophe, it would

also leave us defenseless against eventual asteroidal and

cometary impacts.

Or you might imagine throttling back much further, back

to hunter-gatherer society, where we live off the natural

products of the land and abandon even agriculture. Javelin,

digging stick, bow, arrow, and fire would then be

technology enough. But the Earth could support at the very

most a few tens of mil ions of hunter-gatherers. How could

we get down to such low population levels without

instigating the very catastrophes we are trying to avoid?

Besides, we hardly know how to live the hunter-gatherer life

anymore: We've forgotten their cultures, their skil s, their

tool-kits. We've kil ed off almost al of them, and we've

destroyed much of the environment that sustained them.

Except for a tiny remnant of us, we might not be able, even

if we gave it high priority, to go back. And again, even if we

could return, we would be helpless before the impact

catastrophe that inexorably wil come.

The alternatives seem worse than cruel: They are

ineffective. Many of the dangers we face indeed arise

from

science

and

technology—but,

more

fundamental y, because we leave become powerful

without becoming commensurately wise. The world-

altering powers that technology has delivered into our

hands now require a degree of consideration and

foresight that has never before been asked of us.

Science cuts two ways, of course; its products can

be used for both good and evil. But there's no turning

back from science. The early warnings about

technological dangers also come from science. The

solutions may wel require more of us than just a

technological fix. Many wil have to become

scientifical y literate. We may have to change

institutions and behavior. But our problems, whatever

their origin, cannot be solved apart from science. The

technologies that threaten us and the circumvention of

those threats both issue from the same font. They are

racing neck and neck.

In contrast, with human societies on several worlds,

our prospects would be far more favorable. Our

portfolio would be diversified. Our eggs would be,

almost literal y, in many baskets. Each society would

tend to be proud of the virtues of its world, its planetary

engineering, its social conventions, its hereditary

predispositions. Necessarily, cultural differences

would be cherished and exaggerated. This diversity

would serve as a tool of survival.

When the off Earth settlements are better able to

fend for themselves, they wil have every reason to

encourage technological advance, openness of spirit,

and adventure—even if those left on Earth are obliged

to prize caution, fear new knowledge, and institute

Draconian social controls. After the first few self-

sustaining communities are established on other

worlds, the Earthlings might also be able to relax their

strictures and lighten up. The humans in space would

provide those on Earth with real protection against

rare but catastrophic col isions by asteroids or comets

on rogue trajectories. Of course, for this very reason,

humans in space would hold the upper hand in any

serious dispute with those on Earth.

The prospects of such a time contrast provocatively with

forecasts that the progress of science and technology is

now near some asymptotic limit; that art, literature, and

music are never to approach, much less exceed, the

heights our species has, on occasion, already touched; and

that political life on Earth is about to settle into some rock-

stable liberal democratic world government, identified, after

Hegel, as "the end of history." Such an expansion into

space also contrasts with a different but likewise

discernible trend in recent times—toward authoritarianism,

censorship, ethnic hatred, and a deep suspicion of curiosity

and learning. Instead, I think that, after some debugging, the

settlement of the Solar System presages an open-ended

era of dazzling advances in science and technology;

cultural flowering; and wide-ranging experiments, up there

in the sky, in government and social organization. In more

than one respect, exploring the Solar System and

homesteading other worlds constitutes the beginning, much

more than the end, of history.

IT'S IMPOSSIBLE, for us humans at least, to look into our future,

certainly not centuries ahead. No one has ever done so

with any consistency and detail. I certainly do not imagine

that I can. I have, with some trepidation, gone as far as I

have to this point in the book, because we are just

recognizing the truly unprecedented chal enges brought on

by our technology. These chal enges have, I think,

occasional straightforward implications, some of which I've

tried briefly to lay out. There are also less straightforward,

much longer-term implications about which I'm even less

confident. Nevertheless, I'd like to present them too for your

consideration:

Even when our descendants are established on near-

Earth asteroids and Mars and the moons of the outer Solar

System and the Kuiper Comet Belt, it stil won't be entirely

safe. In the long run, the Sun may generate stupendous X-

ray and ultraviolet outbursts; the Solar System wil enter one

of the vast interstel ar clouds lurking nearby and the planets

wil darken and cool; a shower of deadly comets wil come

roaring out of the Oort Cloud threatening civilizations on

many adjacent worlds; we wil recognize that a nearby star

is about to become a supernova. In the real y long run, the

Sun—on its way to becoming a red giant star—wil get

bigger and brighter, the Earth wil begin to lose its air and

water to space, the soil wil char, the oceans wil evaporate

and boil, the rocks wil vaporize, and our planet may even

be swal owed up into the interior of the Sun.

Far from being made for us, eventual y the Solar System

wil become too dangerous for us. In the long run, putting al

our eggs in a single stel ar basket, no matter how reliable

the Solar System has been lately, may be too risky. In the

long run, as Tsiolkovsky and Goddard long ago recognized,

we need to leave the Solar System.

If that's true for us, you might very wel ask, why isn't it

true for others? And if it is true for others, why aren't they

here? There are many possible answers, including the

contention that they have come here—although the

evidence for that is pitiful y slim. Or there may be no one

else out there, because they destroy themselves, with

almost no exceptions, before they achieve interstel ar flight;

or because in a galaxy of 400 bil ion suns ours is the first

technical civilization.

A more likely explanation, I think, issues from the

simple fact that space is vast and the stars are far apart.

Even if there were civilizations much older and more

advanced than we—expanding out from their home worlds,

reworking new worlds, and then continuing onward to other

stars—they would be unlikely, according to calculations

performed by Wil iam I. Newman of UCLA and me, to be

here. Yet. And because the speed of light is finite, the TV

and radar news that a technical civilization has arisen on

some planet of the Sun has not reached them. Yet.

Should optimistic estimates prevail and one in every

mil ion stars shelters a nearby technological

civilization, and if as wel they're randomly strewn

through the Milky Way—were these provisos to hold—

then the nearest one, we recal , would be a few

hundred light-years distant: at the closest, maybe 100

lightyears, more likely a thousand light-years-and, of

course, perhaps nowhere, no matter how far. Suppose

the nearest civilization on a planet of another star is,

say, 200 light-years away. Then, some 150 years from

now they'l begin to receive our feeble post-World War

I television and radar emission. What wil they make of

it? With each passing year the signal wil get louder,

more interesting, perhaps more alarming. Eventual y,

they may respond: by returning a radio message, or by

visiting. In either case, the response wil likely be

limited by the finite value of the speed of light. With

these wildly uncertain numbers, the answer to our

unintentional mid-century cal into the depths of space

wil not arrive until around the year 2350. If they're

farther away, of course, it wil take longer; and if much

farther away, much longer. The interesting possibility

arises that our first receipt of a message from an alien

civilization, a message intended for us (not just an al -

points bul etin), wil occur in a time when we are wel

situated on many worlds in our solar system and

preparing to move on.

With or without such a message, though, we wil

have reason to continue outward, seeking other solar

systems. Or—even safer in this unpredictable and

violent sector of the Galaxy—to sequester some of us

in self-sufficient habitations in interstel ar space, far

from the dangers constituted by the stars. Such a

future would, I think, natural y evolve, by slow

increments, even without any grand goal of interstel ar

travel:

For safety, some communities may wish to sever

their ties with the rest of humanity—uninfluenced by

other

societies,

other

ethical

codes,

other

technological imperatives. In a time when comets and

asteroids are being routinely repositioned, we wil be

able to populate a smal world and then cut it loose. In

successive generations, as this world sped outward,

the Earth would fade from bright star to pale dot to

invisibility; the Sun would appear dimmer, until it was

no more than a vaguely yel ow point of light, lost among

thousands of others. The travelers would approach

interstel ar night. Some such communities may be

content with occasional radio and laser traffic with the

old home worlds. Others, confident of the superiority of

their own survival chances and wary of contamination,

may try to disappear. Perhaps al contact with them wil

ultimately be lost, their very existence forgotten.

Even the resources of a sizable asteroid or comet

are finite, though, and eventual y more resources must

be sought elsewhere—especial y water, needed for

drink, for a breathable oxygen atmosphere, and for

hydrogen to power fusion reactors. So in the long run

these communities must migrate from world to world,

with no lasting loyalty to any. We might cal it

"pioneering," or "homesteading." A less sympathetic

observer might describe it as sucking dry the

resources of little world after little world. But there are a

tril ion little worlds in the Oort Comet Cloud.

Living in smal numbers on a modest stepmother

world far from the Sun, we wil know that every scrap of

food and every drop of water is dependent on the

smooth operation of a

farsighted technology; but these conditions are not

radical y unlike those to which we are already

accustomed. Digging resources out of the ground and

stalking passing resources seem oddly familiar, like a

forgotten memory of childhood: It is, with a few

significant changes, the strategy of our hunter-gatherer

ancestors. For 99.9 percent of the tenure of humans on

Earth, we lived such a life. Judging from some of the

last surviving hunter-gatherers just before they were

engulfed by the present global civilization, we may

have been relatively happy. It's the kind of life that

forged us. So after a brief, only partial y successful

sedentary experiment, we may become wanderers

again-more technological than last time, but even then

our technology, stone tools and fire, was our only

hedge against extinction.

If safety lies in isolation and remoteness, then some

of our descendants wil eventual y emigrate to the outer

comets of the Oort Cloud. With a tril ion cometary

nuclei, each separated from the next by about as much

as Mars is from Earth, there wil be a great deal to do

out there.[***********]

The outer edge of the Sun's Oort Cloud is perhaps

halfway to the nearest star. Not every other star has an

Oort Cloud, but many probably do. As the Sun passes

nearby stars, our Oort Cloud wil encounter, and

partial y pass through, other comet clouds, like two

swarms of gnats interpenetrating but not col iding. To

occupy a comet of another star wil then be not much

more difficult than to occupy one of our own. From the

frontiers of some other solar system the children of the

blue dot may peer longingly at the moving points of

light denoting substantial (and wel -lit) planets. Some

communities—feeling the ancient human love for

oceans and sunlight stirring within them—may begin

the long journey down to the bright, warm, and clement

planets of a new sun.

Other communities may consider this last strategy a

weakness.

Planets

are

associated

with

natural

catastrophes. Planets may have pre-existing life and

intel igence. Planets are easy for other beings to find.

Better to remain in the darkness. Better to spread

ourselves among many "smal and obscure worlds. Better

to stay hidden.

ONCE WE CAN SEND our machines and ourselves far from

home, far from the planets—once we real y enter the

theater of the Universe—we are bound to come upon

phenomena unlike anything we've ever encountered. Here

are three possible examples:

First: Starting some 550 astronomical units (AU) out—

about ten times farther from the Sun than Jupiter, and

therefore much more accessible than the Oort Cloud—

there's something extraordinary. Just as an ordinary lens

focuses far-off images, so does gravity. (Gravitational

lensing by distant stars and galaxies is now being

detected.) Five hundred fifty AU from the Sun—only a year

away if we could travel at 1 percent the speed of light—is

where the focus begins (although when effects of the solar

corona, the halo of ionized gas surrounding the Sun, are

taken into account, the focus may be considerably farther

out). There, distant radio signals are enormously enhanced,

amplifying whispers. The magnification of distant images

would al ow us (with a modest radio telescope) to resolve a

continent at the distance of the nearest star and the inner

Solar System at the distance of the nearest spiral galaxy. If

you are free to roam an imaginary spherical shel at the

appropriate focal distance and centered on the Sun, you

are free to explore the Universe in stupendous

magnification, to peer at it with unprecedented clarity, to

eavesdrop on the radio signals of distant civilizations, if

any, and to glimpse the earliest events in the history of the

Universe. Alternatively, the lens could be used the other

way, to amplify a very modest signal of ours so it could be

heard over immense distances. There are reasons that

draw us to hundreds and thousands of AU. Other

civilizations wil have their own regions of gravitational

focusing, depending on the mass and radius of their star,

some a little closer, some a little farther away than ours.

Gravitational lensing may serve as a common inducement

for civilizations to explore the regions just beyond the

planetary parts of their solar systems.

Second: Spend a moment thinking about brown dwarfs,

hypothetical very low temperature stars, considerably more

massive than Jupiter, but considerably less massive than

the Sun. Nobody knows if brown dwarfs exist. Some

experts, using nearer stars as gravitational lenses to detect

the presence of more distant ones, claim to have found

evidence of brown dwarfs. From the tiny fraction of the

whole sky that has so far been observed by this technique,

an enormous number of brown dwarfs is inferred. Others

disagree. In the 1950s, it was suggested by the astronomer

Harlow Shapley of Harvard that brown dwarfs—he cal ed

them "Lil iputian stars"—were inhabited. He pictured their

surfaces as warm as a June day in Cambridge, with lots of

area. They would be stars that humans could survive on and

explore.

Third: The physicists B. J. Carr and Stephen Hawking of

Cambridge University have shown that fluctuations in the

density of matter in the earliest stages of the Universe

could have generated a wide variety of smal black holes.

Primordial black holes—if they exist—must decay by

emitting radiation to space, a consequence of the laws of

quantum mechanics. The less massive the black hole, the

faster it dissipates. Any primordial black hole in the final

stages of decay today would have to weigh about as much

as a mountain. Al the smal er ones are gone. Since the

abundance—to say nothing of the existence—of primordial

black holes depends on what happened in the earliest

moments after the Big Bang, no one can be sure that there

are any to be found; we certainly can't be sure that any lie

nearby. Not very restrictive upper limits on their abundance

have been set by the failure so far to find short gamma ray

pulses, a component of the Hawking radiation.

In a separate study, G. E. Brown of Caltech and the

pioneering nuclear physicist Hans Bethe of Cornel suggest

that about a bil ion non-primordial black holes are strewn

through the Galaxy, generated in the evolution of stars. If so,

the nearest may be only 10 or 20 lightyears away.

If there are black holes within reach—whether they're as

massive as mountains or as stars—we wil have amazing

physics to study firsthand, as wel as a formidable new

source of energy. By no means do I claim that brown dwarfs

or primordial black holes are likely within a few light-years,

or anywhere. But as we enter interstel ar space, it is

inevitable that we wil stumble upon whole new categories

of wonders and delights, some with transforming practical

applications.

I do not know where my train of argument ends. As more

time passes, attractive new denizens of the cosmic zoo wil

draw us farther outward, and increasingly improbable and

deadly catastrophes must come to pass. The probabilities

are cumulative. But, as time goes on, technological species

wil also accrue greater and greater powers, far surpassing

any we can imagine today. Perhaps, if we are very skil ful

(lucky, I think, won't be enough), we wil ultimately spread far

from home, sailing through the starry archipelagos of the

vast Milky Way Galaxy. If we come upon anyone else—or,

more likely, if they come upon us—we wil harmoniously

interact. Since other spacefaring civilizations are likely to

be much more advanced than we, quarrelsome humans in

interstel ar space are unlikely to last long.

Eventual y, our future may be as Voltaire, of al

people, imagined:

Sometimes by the help of a sunbeam, and

sometimes by the convenience of a comet, [they]

glided from sphere to sphere, as a bird hops from

bough to bough. In a very little time [they] posted

through the Milky Way . . .

We are, even now, discovering vast numbers of gas and

dust disks around young stars—the very structures out of

which, in our solar system four and a half bil ion years ago,

the Earth and the other planets formed. We're beginning to

understand how fine dust grains slowly grow into worlds;

how big Earthlike planets accrete and then quickly capture

hydrogen and helium to become the hidden cores of gas

giants; and how smal terrestrial planets remain

comparatively bare of atmosphere. We are reconstructing

the histories of worlds—how mainly ices and organics

col ected together in the chil y outskirts of the early Solar

System, and mainly rock and metal in the inner regions

warmed by the young Sun. We have begun to recognize the

dominant role of early col isions in knocking worlds over,

gouging huge craters and basins in their surfaces and

interiors, spinning them up, making and obliterating moons,

creating rings, carrying, it may be, whole oceans down from

the skies, and then depositing a veneer of organic matter

as the neat finishing touch in the creation of worlds. We are

beginning to apply this knowledge to other systems.

In the next few decades we have a real chance of

examining the layout and something of the composition of

many other mature planetary systems around nearby stars.

We wil begin to know which aspects of our system are the

rule and which the exception. What is more common—

planets like Jupiter, planets like Neptune, or planets like

Earth? Or do al other systems have Jupiters and Neptunes

and Earths? What other categories of worlds are there,

currently unknown to us? Are al solar systems embedded

in a vast spherical cloud of comets? Most stars in the sky

are not solitary suns like our own, but double or multiple

systems in which the stars are in mutual orbit. Are there

planets in such systems? If so, what are they like? If, as we

now think, planetary systems are a routine consequence of

the origin of suns, have they fol owed very different

evolutionary paths elsewhere? What do elderly planetary

systems, bil ions of years more evolved than ours, look

like? In the next few centuries our knowledge of other

systems wil become increasingly comprehensive. We wil

begin to know which to visit, which to seed, and which to

settle.

Imagine we could accelerate continuously at 1 g—what

we're comfortable with on good old terra firma—to the

midpoint of our voyage, and decelerate continuously at 1 g

until we arrive at our destination. It would then take a day to

get to Mars, a week and a half to Pluto, a year to the Oort

Cloud, and a few years to the nearest stars.

Even a modest extrapolation of our recent advances in

transportation suggests that in only a few centuries we wil

be able to travel close to the speed of light. Perhaps this is

hopelessly optimistic. Perhaps it wil real y take mil ennia or

more. But unless we destroy ourselves first we wil be

inventing new technologies as strange to us as Voyager

might be to our hunter-gatherer ancestors. Even today we

can think of ways—clumsy, ruinously expensive, inefficient

to be sure—of constructing a starship that approaches light

speed. In time, the designs wil become more elegant,

more affordable, more efficient. The day wil come when we

overcome the necessity of jumping from comet to comet.

We wil begin to soar through the light-years and, as St.

Augustine said of the gods of the ancient Greeks and

Romans, colonize the sky.

Such descendants may be tens or hundreds of

generations removed from anyone who ever lived on the

surface of a planet. Their cultures wil be different, their

technologies far advanced, their languages changed, their

association with machine intel igence much more intimate,

perhaps their very appearance markedly altered from that

of their nearly mythical ancestors who first tentatively set

forth in the late twentieth century into the sea of space. But

they wil be human, at least in large part; they wil be

practitioners of high technology; they wil have historical

records. Despite Augustine's judgment on Lot's wife, that

"no one who is being saved should long for what he is

leaving," they wil not whol y forget the Earth.

But we're not nearly ready, you may be thinking. As

Voltaire put it in his Memnon, "our little terraqueous

globe is the madhouse of those hundred thousand

mil ions[†††††††††††] of worlds." We, who

cannot even put our own planetary home in order, riven

with rivalries and hatreds, despoiling our environment,

murdering one another through irritation and inattention

as wel as on deadly purpose, and moreover a species

that until only recently was convinced that the Universe

was made for its sole benefit—are we to venture out

into space, move worlds, reengineer planets, spread

to neighboring star systems?

I do not imagine that it is precisely we, with our present

customs and social conventions, who wil be out there. If we

continue to accumulate only power and not wisdom, we wil

surely destroy ourselves. Our very existence in that distant

time requires that we wil have changed our institutions and

ourselves. How can I dare to guess about humans in the far

future? It is, I think, only a matter of natural selection. If we

become even slightly more violent, shortsighted, ignorant,

and selfish than we are now, almost certainly we wil have

no future.

If you're young, it's just possible that we wil be taking our

first steps on near-Earth asteroids and Mars during your

lifetime. To spread out to the moons of the Jovian planets

and the Kuiper Comet Belt wil take many generations

more. The Oort Cloud wil require much longer stil . By the

time we're ready to settle even the nearest other planetary

systems, we wil have changed. The simple passage of so

many generations wil have changed us. The different

circumstances we wil be living under wil have changed us.

Prostheses and genetic engineering wil have changed us.

Necessity wil have changed us. We're an adaptable

species.

It wil not be we who reach Alpha Centauri and the other

nearby stars. It wil be a species very like us, but with more

of our strengths and fewer of our weaknesses, a species

returned to circumstances more like those for which it was

original y evolved, more confident, farseeing, capable, and

prudent—the sorts of beings we would want to represent us

in a Universe that, for al we know, is fil ed with species

much older, much more powerful, and very different.

The vast distances that separate the stars are

providential. Beings and worlds are quarantined from one

another. The quarantine is lifted only for those with sufficient

self-knowledge and judgment to have safely traveled from

star to star.

ON IMMENSE TIMESCALES, in hundreds of mil ions to bil ions of

years, the centers of galaxies explode. We see, scattered

across deep space, galaxies with "active nuclei," quasars,

galaxies distorted by col isions, their spiral arms disrupted,

star systems blasted with radiation or gobbled up by black

holes—and we gather that on such timescales even

interstel ar space, even galaxies may not be safe.

There is a halo of dark matter surrounding the Milky

Way, extending perhaps halfway to the distance of the next

spiral galaxy (M31 in the constel ation Andromeda, which

also contains hundreds of bil ions of stars). We do not know

what this dark matter is, or how it is arranged—but

some[‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡‡] of it may be in worlds

untethered to individual stars. If so, our descendants of the

remote future wil have an opportunity, over unimaginable

intervals of time, to become established in intergalactic

space, and to tiptoe to other galaxies.

But on the timescale for populating our galaxy, if not

long before, we must ask: How immutable is this

longing for safety that drives us outward? Wil we one

day feel content with the time our species has had and

our successes, and wil ingly exit the cosmic stage?

Mil ions of years from now—probably much sooner—

we wil have made ourselves into something else.

Even if we do nothing intentional y, the natural process

of mutation and selection wil have worked our

extinction or evolved us into some other species on

just such a timescale (if we may judge by other

mammals). Over the typical lifetime of a mammalian

species, even if we were able to travel close to the

speed of light and were dedicated to nothing else, we

could not, I think, explore even a representative fraction

of the Milky Way Galaxy. There's just too much of it.

And beyond are a hundred bil ion galaxies more. Wil

our present motivations remain unchanged over

geological, much less cosmological, timescales—

when we ourselves have been transfigured? In such

remote epochs, we may discover outlets for our

ambitions far grander and more worthy than merely

populating an unlimited number of worlds.

Perhaps, some scientists have imagined, we wil one

day create new forms of life, link minds, colonize stars,

reconfigure galaxies, or prevent, in a nearby volume of

space, the expansion of the Universe. In a 1993 article in

the journal Nuclear Physics, the physicist Andrei Linde—

conceivably, in a playful mood—suggests that laboratory

experiments (it would have to be quite a laboratory) to

create separate, closed-off, expanding universes might

ultimately be possible. "However," he writes to me, "I myself

do not know whether [this suggestion] is simply a joke or

something else." In such a list of projects for the far future,

we wil have no difficulty in recognizing a continuing human

ambition to arrogate powers once considered godlike—or,

in that other more encouraging metaphor, to complete the

Creation.

FOR MANY PAGES NOW, we have left the realm of plausible

conjecture

for

the

heady

intoxication

of

nearly

unconstrained speculation. It is time to return to our own

age.

My grandfather, born before radio waves were even a

laboratory curiosity, almost lived to see the first artificial

satel ite beeping down at us from space. There are people

who were born before there was such a thing as an

airplane, and who in old age saw four ships launched to the

stars. For al our failings, despite our limitations and

fal ibilities, we humans are capable of greatness. This is

true of our science and some areas of our technology, of

our art, music, literature, altruism, and compassion, and

even, on rare occasion, of our statecraft. What new

wonders undreamt of in our time wil we have wrought in

another generation? And another? How far wil our nomadic

species have wandered by the end of the next century? And

the next mil ennium?

Two bil ion years ago our ancestors were microbes; a

halfbil ion years ago, fish; a hundred mil ion years ago,

something like mice; ten mil ion years ago, arboreal apes;

and a mil ion years ago, proto-humans puzzling out the

taming of fire. Our evolutionary lineage is marked by

mastery of change. In our time, the pace is quickening.

When we first venture to a near-Earth asteroid, we wil

have entered a habitat that may engage our species

forever. The first voyage of men and women to Mars is the

key step in transforming us into a multiplanet species.

These events are as momentous as the colonization of the

land by our amphibian ancestors and the descent from the

trees by our primate ancestors.

Fish with rudimentary lungs and fins slightly adapted

for walking must have died in great numbers before

establishing a permanent foothold on the land. As the

forests slowly receded, our upright apelike forebears often

scurried back into the trees, fleeing the predators that

stalked the savannahs. The transitions were painful, took

mil ions of years, and were imperceptible to those involved.

In our case the transition occupies only a few generations,

and with only a handful of lives lost. The pace is so swift that

we are stil barely able to grasp what is happening.

Once the first children are born off Earth; once we have

bases and homesteads on asteroids, comets, moons, and

planets; once we're living off the land and bringing up new

generations on other worlds, something wil have changed

forever in human history. But inhabiting other worlds does

not imply abandoning this one, any more than the evolution

of amphibians meant the end of fish. For a very long time

only a smal fraction of us wil be out there.

"In modern Western society," writes the scholar

Charles Lindholm,

the erosion of tradition and the col apse of

accepted religious belief leaves us without a telos

[an end to which we strive], a sanctified notion of

humanity's potential. Bereft of a sacred project,

we have only a demystified image of a frail and

fal ible humanity no longer capable of becoming

god-like.

I believe it is healthy—indeed, essential—to keep our frailty

and fal ibility firmly in mind. I worry about people who aspire

to be "god-like." But as for a long-term goal and a sacred

project, there is one before us. On it the very survival of our

species depends. If we have been locked and bolted into a

prison of the self, here is an escape hatch—something

worthy, something vastly larger than ourselves, a crucial act

on behalf of humanity. Peopling other worlds unifies nations

and ethnic groups, binds the generations, and requires us

to be both smart and wise. It liberates our nature and, in

part, returns us to our beginnings. Even now, this new telos

is within our grasp.

The pioneering psychologist Wil iam James cal ed

religion a "feeling of being at home in the Universe." Our

tendency has been, as I described in the early chapters of

this book, to pretend that the Universe is how we wish our

home would be, rather than to revise our notion of what's

homey so it embraces the Universe. If, in considering

James' definition, we mean the real Universe, then we have

no true religion yet. That is for another time, when the sting

of the Great Demotions is wel behind us, when we are

acclimatized to other worlds and they to us, when we are

spreading outward to the stars.

The Cosmos extends, for al practical purposes,

forever. After a brief sedentary hiatus, we are

resuming our ancient nomadic way of life. Our remote

descendants, safely arrayed on many worlds through

the Solar System and beyond, wil be unified by their

common heritage, by their regard for their home

planet, and by the knowledge that, whatever other life

may be, the only humans in al the Universe come from

Earth.

They wil gaze up and strain to find the blue dot in

their skies. They wil love it no less for its obscurity and

fragility. They wil marvel at how vulnerable the

repository of al our potential once was, how perilous

our infancy, how humble our beginnings, how many

rivers we had to cross before we found our way.